Seasons of Our Joy 
\€g 7%, . 
®. mm? 
Lah) On. = 
\ ! 
SPyOWIY PIN WIT MWYI INS WIN "IYI YI WII FP Wa29 py my 
Rabbi Arthur O. Waskow With a new afterword by the author 


f/ Pie 
4 


SEASONS OF OUR JOY 


University of Nebraska Press 
Lincoln 


SEASONS 
OF 
OUR JOY A MODERN GUIDE TO 
THESE WIStHHORIDAYS 
RABBI ARTHUR O. WASKOW 
ILLUSTRATED WITH PAPERCUTS BY 
MARTIN FARREN AND 
JOAN BENJAMIN-FARREN 
seasoned with recipes by 
Rose Gertz, Hannah Waskow, 
Rose Sue Berstein, and Rabbi Phyllis O. Berman 
With a new afterword by the author 
The Jewish Publication Society 
JPS Philadelphia 


© 1982 by Arthur Waskow 
Papercuts © 1982 by Martin Farren and Joan Benjamin-Farren 
“Afterword Again” © 2012 by Arthur Waskow 
All rights reserved. Published by the University of Nebraska Press 
as a Jewish Publication Society book. First Nebraska paperback 
printing: 2012. 
Cover art courtesy Jeanette Kuvin Oren 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Waskow, Arthur Ocean, 1933- 
Seasons of our joy: a modern guide to the Jewish holidays / Arthur 
O. Waskow; illustrated with papercuts by Martin Farren and Joan 
Benjamin-Farren; seasoned with recipes by Rose Gertz, Hannah 
Waskow, Rose Sue Berstein, and Phyllis O. Berman; with a new 
afterword by the author. 
p. cm. 
Reprint. Originally published: Toronto; New York: Bantam Books, 
1982. 
“Published by the University of Nebraska Press as a Jewish 
Publication Society book.” 
Includes bibliographical references. 
ISBN 978-0-8276-0930-3 (pbk.: alk. paper) 
1. Fasts and feasts—Judaism. 2. Jewish cooking. I. Title. 
BM690.W28 2012 
296.4'3—dce23 2012017702 


Said one chassid to another: ‘‘Have you come to the Rebbe to 
hear him teach Torah?” 
“No, I have come to watch him tie his shoelaces. From his life 
] will come to understand living.” 
For Max Ticktin and Zalman Schachter-Shalomi, who have 
taught me both tying and Torah. 
And in memory of 
Rose Honigman Osnowitz Gertz, my grandmother, 
Who taught me the rhythm of the blessings for a storm of sneezes: 
May you grow long and broad as Purim challah! 
Who saw in our joyful sit-in band an echo of the rebels of 1905; 
Who insisted against my skepticism—surely at 90 she was too old to 
get it right—that at Purim you ate chickpeas. . . 
And was right. 
And Hannah Hilda Leah Osnowitz Waskow, my mother, 
Who fought for breath for half her life 
And taught me that the Breath of Life is holy; 
Who fought for justice all her life 
And taught me that the struggle is unending; 
Who ate pistachio ice cream with a passion; 
Who loved with fierce and open eyes 
And at the end was fierce and open-eyed. . . 
And loving. 
Together they seasoned this book with their joy in good food and 
their skill in cooking it. 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2021 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 
https://archive.org/details/seasonsofourjoym0000wask_a2r0 


@>> CONTENTS €€e 
INTRODUCTION 
HOW TO READ THIS BOOK 
A WORD ON HEBREW 
PREFACE: Seasons of the Sun, Seasons of the Moon 
CHAPTER ONE Heading Up the Year—Rosh Hashanah 
CHAPTER TWO Face to Face—Yom Kippur 
CHAPTER THREE Harvest Moon—Fulfillment at Sukkot 
CHAPTER FOUR Seed for Winter—Sh’mini Atzeret 
CHAPTER FIVE Dancing with Torah—Simchat Torah 
CHAPTER SIX Dark of the Sun, Dark of the Moon—Hanukkah 
CHAPTER SEVEN The Tree that Sustains All Life—Tu B’Shvat 
CHAPTER EIGHT Spring Fever—Purim 
CHAPTER NINE Giving Birth to Freedom—Pesach 
CHAPTER TEN Trek through Anxiety and Hope—Counting the Omer 
CHAPTER ELEVEN Peak Experience—Shavuot 
CHAPTER TWELVE Burnt Offering—Tisha B’Av 
AFTERWORD AND FOREWORD 
FROM GENERATION TO GENERATION 
APPENDIX 1 The Second Day of Festivals 
APPENDIX il The Moon 
APPENDIX 111 Glossary 
APPENDIX Iv Go and Study 
THE FESTIVALS AND THE FUTURE 
AFTERWORD AGAIN 105 
OG: 
133 
165 
185 
207 
219 
223 
226 
228 
231 
234 
237 
244 


| sIt~SzPs — ~— ‘ 
Chectawwd 
eR 6. ~ abl TA women taste 
diester) @ Gall gape 
i wallid pene) i ee ee SEZs: 


#3) INTRODUCTION €€ 
The rain. The dew. The dryness. And then rain again, and dew, and 
dryness. The story of the circling year. From the rabbis, mystics, and farmers 
of sixteen centuries ago we have a book that tells the story of the circling 
year. That teaches us what to do if the delicate machinery should stop—if the 
rain that lubricates the circling year should stop, and the movement from 
warm to cold, from dry to wet, should end. The book begins when the rainy 
season in the Land of Israel begins—at Sukkot, the harvest festival—and it 
ends with Yom Kippur, the holy day that comes just before the harvest. So 
the book itself circles through the round of the year. The book is part of the 
Talmud—a gigantic collection of profound conversations, legal debates, and 
tall tales. It is called Fasts, or Ta-anit. 
And in that book there is a story that is five centuries older still. 
The round of the year was broken. The lubricant had failed, and the 
delicate machinery was stuck. For months and months there had been no 
rain. The people sent a message to Honi the Circle-drawer, “Pray that rain 
may fall.” He prayed, but no rain fell. 
So he drew a circle and stood inside it and said to God, “I swear by Your 
great Name that | will not move from here until You have mercy on Your 
children.” Rain began, but only a drizzle. Honi’s followers said to him, “We 
look to you to save us from death; but we believe this drizzle comes only to 
clear you from your oath.” 
So Honi cried out, “I prayed not for this drizzle, but for rain that would 
fill cisterns, ditches, and caves.” The rain then began to come down with 
ope 0 


X + INTRODUCTION 
great force, every drop as big as the opening of a barrel. So his followers said 
to him, “Rabbi, we look to you to save us from death; but we believe this 
torrent comes to destroy the world.” Honi cried out to God again: “I prayed 
not for this torrent but for a rain of benevolence, blessing, and bounty.” 
Then rain fell in a normal way until the thirsty land was full, the streams 
abrim, and floods coming. So Honi prayed again, “Your people cannot 
endure too much punishment nor too much benefit. May it be Your will that 
the rain may stop and there be relief for the world.” Immediately the wind 
began to blow, the clouds dispersed, and the sun shone. The people went out 
into the fields to gather mushrooms. 
But the head of the rabbinical court sent word to Honi, “If you were not 
Honi, | would have you excommunicated for forcing the hand of God. But 
you!—you act like a petulant child before God and He does what you want, 
as a father grants the desires of his favorite son.” 
What was the circle in which Honi stood to force God’s hand? 
At the end of the book of Ta-anit, a rabbi glimpsed the future: In days to 
come the Blessed Holy One will hold a circle-dance for the tzaddikim, the 
righteous men and women. God will sit in their midst in the Garden of Eden, 
and as they dance around, every one of them will point a finger toward God, 
singing, “You are our God, for whom we waited, that You might save us. You 
are the Lord for whom we waited, we will be glad and rejoice in Your 
salvation.” 
What is this circle that the tzaddikim will dance in? 
These circles are the cycles of the year. Honi was telling God, “If you 
have stopped the circle I will stop the circle. I will not leave here until you 
release the round of the year.” The tzaddikim were telling God, “We rejoice 
in a circle because You rejoice in a circle. We waited and You sent us the 
circle of Your seasons.” 
This book is about the circle of the seasons, the round of the year, the 
festivals of joy with which the Jewish people dance our praise of God. There 
are moments of dryness, sadness, in the cycle—but beneath them there is a 
deeper joy in the circling of the year. So all the festivals, even those of 
sadness and solemnity, are seasons of our joy. Let us learn together how to 
dance them. 


@>> HOW TO READ THIS BOOK <€€e® 
This book is about the circle of the year, and also about the points along 
the circle. It can be read two ways. One way is to read straight through it—as 
a kind of biography of a Jewish year. The other way is to focus on one 
particular chapter—on the holy day or festival that is approaching, to help 
you get ready for it. 
Even if you want to use the specific chapters in the second way, you may 
get a better sense of each festival if you read the Preface first. The Preface— 
entitled “Seasons of the Sun, Seasons of the Moon”—is about the circle as a 
whole. The festivals are built upon the cycles of the sun and moon; so a sense 
of the round of the year and the round of the month will be useful if you want 
to concentrate on—say—Sukkot, the harvest festival, or Hanukkah, which 
lights a candle of hope against the winter night of dark despair. 
After the Preface come twelve chapters. Each is about one festival, one 
holy day, or season. Each chapter is divided up this way: 
- A brief passage on the underlying mood of that holy day. This section 
shows how the mood applies not only in the nature cycle of sun and moon, 
but also in the history of the Jewish people and in the spiritual experience of a 
single human being. 
- A history of how that holy time emerged and developed. This section 
shows how many of the festivals grew out of the holy times of other peoples, 
and how the Jewish people shaped and modified their practices, their pat- 
terns, and their meanings till today. 
OFS) c 


xil » HOW TO READ THIS BOOK 
- A section on the formal preparation period that leads up to the holy 
days, if there is one. This section shows how to get ready for the festival. 
* A section describing how the holy day is observed and celebrated now, 
in the present practices of different Jewish communities. This section ex- 
plains prayers, Bible readings, ceremonies, foods, songs, and other practical 
details. 
* A section on new approaches to the festival that are emerging now and 
that may highlight some newly understood meanings in it. These new 
approaches are often especially connected with the “mood” in the first part of 
the chapter and with the phase of that particular festival in the cycle of the 
month and year. 
- A section of recipes. 
* A section suggesting books and guides that are especially useful in 
regard to that one festival. 
There are really three important threads woven into each of these 
chapters. One is the history of the development of the festival. One is the 
guide to current practice among various different Jews. And one is the new 
approaches that are beginning to emerge. 
Most previous books about the Jewish holy days have focused either on 
the history of their development or on the current practices. Why is this book 
different? Because it emerges from a special kind of Jewish consciousness— 
the movement for Jewish renewal. From the standpoint of Jewish renewal, 
the past, the present, and the future are all important. We must lear from the 
history of the holy days how Jews have renewed Judaism over and over in the 
past. We must learn from the present and its glimmerings of the future how 
we might go about renewing Jewish life today. 
What is the movement for Jewish renewal? In the 1970s it began to 
gather together the scattered sparks of Jewish life. This movement began in 
chavurot—small fellowships, participatory congregations where leadership 
was shared and rotated instead of being handed over to hired rabbis; where 
people prayed and studied the Jewish tradition by sitting in circles and talking 
with each other instead of sitting in rows behind each other; where people 
danced and breathed and sang and chanted. But Jewish renewal spreads far 
beyond the chavurot. 
For all of us involved in it—in chavurot, synagogues, Jewish Y’s and 
Centers, for unaffiliated Jewish singers and actors, young lawyers at the UJA 
and dogged liberal precinct workers—for all of us there has been great joy in beginning to repair the shattered holy vessel of Jewish peoplehood. Precisely 
because we have let ourselves experience deeply the pain and grief of the Holocaust, we have been able to renew our Jewish lives. 
For us, for me, the way to renew Jewish life has been to wrestle with the Jewish past and present. Not to bow down before it, not to tum away from it. What is wrestling? It is a close grappling that has some elements of fighting 


HOW TO READ THIS BOOK - Xilii 
and some elements of embracing in it, at the same time and in the same 
process. There are both love and anger in a wrestle. In a wrestle I do not 
pretend my partner is the same as me—and | do not pretend | am the same as 
my partner. We are two; I, who I fully am; and the other, fully other. The 
name of the people Israel—Yisrael—means the Godwrestler, and this is our 
best path of living. So this book is built by wrestling with the Jewish past and 
present. 
This is how the festivals grew through the millennia and still are 
growing. Our most ancient forebears took festivals of the sun and moon, the 
birth of lambs and the harvest of barley—and wrestled with these nature 
festivals to create history festivals, celebrations of political liberations, and 
observances of military disasters. They wrestled with history and nature to 
create festivals that evoked and embodied the deepest yearnings, fears, and 
even clownings of the human spirit. In the Biblical age, they focused these 
celebrations on offering up plants and animals at a sacred site. 
After the Holy Temple was destroyed and the sacrifices were ended, the 
ancient rabbis wrestled with the festivals again. They developed prayer and 
ceremony, food and song, that would express the same—or new—deep 
human needs; that would fulfill the commands inscribed deep within the 
human spirit by the Root of Being. They knew they were doing much that 
was new; they felt they were hearing commands and ideas that were old. 
They felt that level after level of Torah was unveiled when they studied 
Torah—when they unveiled the hidden truths. 
In some ways we are like the ancient rabbis. We, after the Holocaust 
and the invention of thermonuclear weapons, feel our lives deeply 
threatened—as they did after the Destruction of the Temple and the decima- 
tion of the Jewish community in the Land of Israel. We have been deeply 
influenced by Modernism, as the rabbis were by Greek culture, Hellenism. 
As modernized Jews, we have begun to renew Judaism by wrestling with its 
sources—just as they did. 
How are we different from the ancient rabbis? We are women and men 
together, equal. We live in both the land of Israel and the far-flung Diaspora, 
as a people and even as individuals. We may care more about our bodies and 
about the body of the earth. We may care more about our separate selves, our 
individualities, than they did. We may be more conscious of the process of 
our own change than they were. We may especially be more conscious that 
not only our own study of Torah, but also the changed historical conditions 
of our lives help us to unveil the hidden truths of Torah. We may care more 
about why some practice or idea gives us vitality—instead of doing it because 
the text, the book, says to do it. 
For example: readers will note in Chapters X and XI that I take a lot of 
time and space to work out why the ancient rabbis were so concerned with 
the dates when the Counting of the omer began and when it ended, just 


Xiv - HOW TO READ THIS BOOK 
before the festival of Shavuot. Why do I bother? Why not just accept what 
they decided? 
For three reasons. First, because in order to wrestle with the past and 
present we must be clear about exactly what they are. Secondly, because such 
a detective story need not be dull and boring: it can be fun. The rabbis, too, 
had a sense of humor. Sometimes when they haggled over a detail they were 
poking fun at their own habits. And finally, because it is our own habit to 
search for inner meaning. If the rabbis argued so hard about the issue, perhaps 
there was some inner meaning to it. And if we read and think about the text, 
perhaps we will uncover that meaning—or create it for ourselves in a way 
that helps us live and grow. 
In this particular case, for instance, I conclude that the debate over the 
date of Shavuot was about something extraordinarily important: was there a 
festival to celebrate God’s Giving of the Torah at Mount Sinai? Was there 
any time when every Jew could feel he, she, was standing at Sinai now, ready 
to hear God's Voice now? Is Shavuot that date? 
The Torah does not seem to say so, does not explicitly name Shavuot as 
the anniversary of Sinai. So the only way the rabbis could find a time for 
every Jew to hear the Torah anew was for themselves to hear the Torah anew. 
To understand how they did this, we need to trace the process. For us, 
the historical process bears a crucial spiritual meaning. It means we too, 
facing great earthquakes in our world, can remake Jewish life while remaining 
serious Jews devoted to the Torah. That is what the Jewish renewal move- 
ment seeks to do. 
Some Jews may believe that there is no historical process in Torah—that 
Torah does not change. They may be committed to Torah as it was. And 
others may believe in the historical changes, but have given up on Torah. 
They may believe that once we see that Torah changes, we must accept that 
it was temporary. They may become secularists who believe the Jewish people 
are simply those people who see themselves as Jews; God and Torah have 
nothing to do with it. 
The movement for Jewish renewal is, rather, centered on the notion 
that the historical process of Torah is Torah. It is the unfolding of Torah; it is 
veil after veil after veil coming off the Torah, where the veils themselves 
were Torah and what was beneath them was also Torah. 
This book is written from the standpoint of Jewish renewal. But it is 
written toward a much wider audience . . . for if there is to be a real Jewish 
renewal, the whole Jewish people—with all our quirks and quibbles—will 
contribute to it. All the sparks must be regathered in order to repair the holy 
vessel. So this book was written in the hope that all Jews—and also non-Jews 
who are curious about the festivals and think there is something to be learned 
from the Jewish path of life—may find it useful. The book was written for 
those who are simply interested in how the holidays developed, and for those 


HOW TO READ THIS BOOK «+ Xv 
who want to observe them today. It was written for those who are drawn to 
the traditional patterns and those who would like to work out new 
approaches. It was written for those who are synagogue members, and those 
who will do their celebrating alone or with a cluster of friends. It was written 
for those who know very little but want to learn; for those who know a good 
deal but would like to have a handbook handy; and for those who are already 
scholars, but want to hear some new ideas about the meaning of the yearly 
cycle. 
And most of all, it was written for those who would like to argue, 
question, suggest, invent, who would like to join the process. There is an 
ancient tradition of shylah and tshuvah, question and response, among those 
in a Jewish community who are trying to learn together. As the ancient 
rabbis said, “Who are wise? Those who learn from every human being.” So 
let us join together to learn . . . not symbolically, but for real. At the end of 
this book there is an explanation of how we can do this—how you and I can 
learn together. Please join in. 
Shalom! 
Rabbi Arthur O. Waskow 
6711 Lincoln Drive 
Philadelphia, PA 19119 


@> A WORD ON HEBREW €€e® 
When there are translations from Hebrew in this book, the renderings 
are the author’s unless another source is indicated. There is a glossary of 
Hebrew and Yiddish words in Appendix III. 
When there are transliterations of Hebrew, the rendering is the simplest 
possible: an apostrophe where a shva or silent vowel in Hebrew requires a 
slight silent pause; and ch for the throat-clearing sound that is the nearest 
English equivalent of the Hebrew letters chet and chaf. (Where the name of a 
person or festival is known some other way in English—like Honi or Hanuk- 
kah—we will use that form.) The Sephardic (Mediterranean) pronunciation 
of Hebrew words is the one used in transliterations. 
When the book refers to the Sabbath, however, we use Shabbos in the 
Ashkenazic/Yiddish style, because neither the Sephardic Shabbat nor Sab- 
bath conveys the joyful familiarity and love with which Jews greet the 
seventh day, the day of rest and contemplation. 
In most cases we have translated rachum and rachamim as ‘motherly’ 
when they refer to God, rather than with the conventional ‘compassion- 
ate.’ Rechem means womb, and Av Ha-Rachamim can therefore be under- 
stood as Motherly Father. In a tradition that is often accused of a male bias, it 
seems valuable to be fully conscious that God’s attributes include, and 
transcend, maleness and femaleness. 
* Xvi ° 


@33> PREFACE: €€@ 
SEASONS OF THE SUN, SEASONS OF 
THE MOON 
What does it mean to think of seasons of our joy, of a yearly cycle, a 
round of Jewish festivals? Most of us do not think of the Jewish holidays this 
way. Instead, most of us remember them as separate little bubbles of experi- 
ence, each with its own shape and color, each popping up at us without a 
rhythm: 
Passover . . . matzah, wine, the bitter herb, liberation from slavery. 
Rosh Hashanah . . . the ram’s horn blasting out its eerie sound, crowds 
of people in the synagogue, old friends in the community suddenly reappear- 
ing from a summer’s absence. 
Yom Kippur . . . fasting, crying, trying to reckon up our misdeeds, 
feeling a great sense of release at day’s end. 
Hanukkah . . . the candles, the dreidl, the Maccabees fighting for our 
freedom. 
Purim. . . the noise-makers drowning out the sound of wicked Haman’s 
name, hilarious laughter. 
And that’s all. 
For more and more of us, this is either too much—or not enough. 
The holidays have become a kind of ghetto in time—a little enclave in 
our everyday world where we can withdraw into our Jewishness. 
But ghettoes in time are no more comfortable than the ghettoes in space 
used to be. If the holidays are only ghettoes, we tend to forget them. We 
forget how to do them, we depend on the rabbis and professional Jews to do 
them for us, we even forget some of them exist, we let them be bubbles—and 
XV tle 


XVill » PREFACE 
even less and less of that. The ghettoes in space vanished—and for many of 
us the ghettoes in time are vanishing too. And as they vanish, so do the 
things that make Jewish life in America distinctive and attractive. 
But at the same time, more and more of us are experiencing a thirst for 
the water of our spiritual wellsprings, or hunger for the roots of our Jewish 
ethnic origins—or both. This book addresses that thirst and that hunger. To 
fill that thirst and feed that hunger means that we must open up to what the 
holidays can be . . . much more than bubbles. 
First of all, each one of them is richer in its meanings than we are liable 
to remember. Most of them relate to nature, to history, and to our inner 
spiritual lives—and sometimes the same symbol can call forth all those levels 
of response. 
And secondly, all of them are richer than we are liable to remember, 
because they fit together into a coherent whole. As the seasons follow each 
other in a profound pattern, as a human life grows and falls in a profound 
pattern, as a whole society grows and changes in a profound pattern—so do 
the Jewish holidays. 
Indeed, they were intended to teach us how to experience more fully the 
profound patterns of the world—how to enrich them, nurture them, learn 
from them. So if we can learn how the cycle of the festivals works as a cycle, 
we can learn how to live better with the earth and air and water; how to live 
better with each other; and how to live better inside our selves. Chapter by 
chapter, we will deal with each holiday as itself and as part of the cycle. Now, 
at the beginning of our search, we will look at the cycle as a whole. 
The Jewish holidays began with those described in the Torah—the Five 
Books of Moses. At later times—even up to our own generation—new 
holidays were added, greatly enriching our experience of the year. But the 
basic pattern was set 3,000 years ago and more. 
The first thing to notice in that basic pattern is that there are two cycles: 
one based on the sun and one on the moon. 
In part, the two cycles are like each other; in part, they merge with each 
other. They are intended to reinforce each other, to teach the same lessons in 
two different ways. They are an oval with a circle set inside it: 
SHAVUOT 
SUKKOT 
SH'MINI ATZERET 


PREFACE + Xix 
Let us look first at the oval cycle, the one based on the sun. There are 
four festivals, recognizing the four seasons of the year, four moments of 
history, four stages of human life, four states of spiritual consciousness: 
1. Pesach (Passover), in the spring—the moment of birth and newness; 
the birth of the Jewish people, of freedom. The flowers rise up against winter; 
the Israelites rise up against Pharaoh; our creativity first rises up against 
dullness and routine. The great twentieth-century Jewish thinker Franz 
Rosenzweig called Pesach the Festival of Creation. 
2. Shavuot (the Feast of Weeks, Pentecost), seven weeks and a day after 
Pesach—at the onset of summer, the peak of nature’s glory. It reminds us of 
the moment at the peak of Sinai when the Jewish people met God face to face 
in what Jewish tradition called a great wedding ceremony, to receive the Ten 
Commandments and the Torah. in a human’s life it represents the peak of 
early maturity, the onset of adulthood, the moment when a human being’s 
own identity is clear enough that s/he is first able to reach out from one self to 
another. In a spiritual process it is when the glimmering potential becomes a 
shining actuality. Rosenzweig called it the Festival of Revelation. 
3. Sukkot (the Feast of Huts), after harvest in the fall—a festival of 
ingathering, of reaping the benefits of all our work, of fulfillment, of rejoic- 
ing. It reminds us of the era of sojourning in the wilderness, gathering in the 
lessons of the Teaching at Sinai; the era of dwelling safe in fragile huts, 
dwelling safe with God’s Presence in the very midst of Israel. And so it is also 
the moment of history that has not yet happened, the moment of fulfillment 
when all our work is done and Messiah comes. In a human life it represents 
the fullness of a full life: the children grown, the task accomplished. In the 
human spirit it represents the harvest of creativity—the creative work fully 
achieved. Rosenzweig called it Redemption, but Fulfillment may be a better 
word. 
4, Sh’mini Atzeret (the Eighth Day of Assembly and Completion) —This is 
the festival we must explain here at greatest length, because this is the one 
that is least known, that is least visible. It is the barely visible festival, tacked 
on to the end of Sukkot—a signal of the onset of the rainy winter. It is the 
festival of inwardness, contraction, starting over again. It echoes the moment 
of Jewish history when the sojourn in the wilderness ended and a new task 
had to be undertaken. For it echoes the moment of the death of Moses: the 
death that moves at once toward new life, toward the people’s crossing of 
the Jordan into the Land of Israel. When we read the Five Books of Moses in 
the synagogue, week by week, it is at Sh’mini Atzeret time that the reading 
ends with Moses’ death—and begins again at once with Genesis, creation. 
Thus Sh’mini Atzeret completes the cycle: it is the seed gone under- 
ground in seeming death—but only in order to be ready for the spring to give 
it new life. It is the moment when we pray for the chilly rains of winter— 
because we know those rains will grow new food to nourish new life. And 


XX + PREFACE 
indeed, the festival itself is small and hardly visible, just as the seed gone 
underground is hardly visible. In our own lives, Sh’mini Atzeret represents 
the time of inwardness, rethinking, summing up, that infuses a healthy 
death. In the cycle of creativity, it is the moment when the burst of creativity 
is exhausted and what is needed is rethinking and review—so that a kernel of 
new understanding can be passed on to the next stage. For of course the cycle 
of the festivals begins again—with Pesach. 
So goes the year, the circle-dance of life in tune with the music of the 
sun. There is also, as always in Jewish life, another voice, another dance—for 
Jewish life is always the conversation, the wrestle, between two partners. The 
second dance is done to the rhythm of the moon. The Jewish months are 
truly “moonths,” beginning with the new moon and cycling through its 
phases. The month of spring, according to the Torah, is the first of months— 
and according to this counting, the seventh month is Tishri—in the fall. Just 
as Judaism makes holy the seventh day and the seventh year, so it makes holy 
the seventh month. In that month, alone in all the year, there come four 
festivals: 
1. At the new moon, Rosh Hashanah (Top of the Year). Like Pesach in 
the sun cycle, it is a feast of beginning. According to tradition, it is the 
anniversary of the creation of Adam—the birthday of the human race. It is 
the moment for us to begin renewing our spiritual lives, our sense of decency 
and holiness. It is the moment of the rebirth of the moon. 
2. At the phase of the swelling moon, the tenth of Tishri, Yom Kippur 
(Day of Atonement). This is the day of intense relationship with God, the one 
moment when the high priest would enter the Holy of Holies in the ancient 
Temple in Jerusalem. For us it is the moment of deepest, highest striving. As 
Sinai was the moment when the whole Jewish people felt closest to God, so 
Yom Kippur is the moment when each Jewish individual does. So it parallels 
Shavuot in the cycle of the sun. Indeed, according to tradition, Yom Kippur 
is the day when God forgave the sin of the Golden Calf and gave the 
Israelites the second set of Tablets, the second copy of the Ten Command- 
ments. So in this sense also it is a second Shavuot, a second giving of the 
Torah. 
3. Sukkot comes at the full moon, the fulfillment of the moon, on the 
fifteenth of Tishri. It thus plays in the moon cycle the same role it does in the 
sun cycle, when it comes at harvest time in the fulfillment of the sun’s work 
of growing food. Here the two cycles touch and for a moment merge, as 
Sukkot stands with Sukkot. Indeed, this moment is itself one of fulfill ment— 
the merger of the two great cycles of the Jewish sense of time. In a sense, 
Sukkot is itself that Messianic moment when, as Isaiah prophesies, “the light 
of the moon will be like the light of the sun.” 
4. And finally, Sh’mini Atzeret comes on the twenty-second of Tishri, 


PREFACE + XxXi 
when the moon is fast diminishing. So here also the festival of approaching 
winter and the disappearing sun merges with the festival of disappearing 
moon. And here the two cycles begin to diverge again, as the oval and the 
circle move apart. Here both move, in their different speeds, toward dark- 
ness—and rebirth. 
These are the festivals the Torah teaches. Later in Jewish history, the 
yearly cycle was enriched with holidays that fit into the cycle of the year—Tu 
B’Shvat or the new year of trees, when there is the first glimmer of light at 
the end of the tunnel of winter; Purim in the early feverish spring; Lag 
B'Omer, in the sweet and gentle moment between spring and summer; Tisha 
B'Av, in memory of the burning of the Temple, at the hottest, driest moment 
of mid-summer; Simchat Torah, enriching the second day of Sh’mini Atzeret 
as the time to complete and restart the cycle of Torah reading; Hanukkah, 
close to the winter solstice, the darkest moment of the year. These holy days 
were also, with something like spiritual genius, so crafted as to fuse the mood 
of the nature cycle of the sun with the meaning of the historical moments 
they recalled. And they thus provided ceremonies to renew the human spirit 
in its moments of faint hope, crazy hilarity, sunny pleasure, bitter grief, deep 
despair. 
The tradition also provided introductions and departures—a kind of 
connective tissue—for several of the major holy seasons. The Torah itself 
provided that from Pesach to Shavuot there should be a counting, day by day, 
of the omer—a sheaf of barley from the spring crop, ripening day by day in 
different fields in the Land of Israel. Before Tisha B’Av there arrives the 
shadow of our mourning, and afterward there are the seven Sabbaths of 
Consolation; and in Elul, a month of study and preparation just before Rosh 
Hashanah. 
And finally, in our own day there has been the effort to proclaim two 
(and among some groups three) new holy days commemorating the earth- 
quakes of this past gerieration: Yom Hashoah, Holocaust Remembrance Day, 
and Yom Ha-atzma-ut, the anniversary of Israeli independence. * The date of 
Yom Ha-atzma-ut was a given; the date of Yom Hashoah was set ten days 
before it, as an arbitrary choice. Both of them fall in the period of omer, the 
time between Pesach and Shavuot. It is interesting to note that the one 
whose history more accords with the sense of spring and celebration—Yom 
Ha-atzma-ut—has become a mass event in America in the form of rallies and 
parades for Israel Independence Day. The other, with its historical freight of 
utter destruction and disaster, has been much harder for large numbers of 
*Some groups have urged the celebration of Yom Yerushalayim, commemorating 
the day in 1967 when Israel and the Jewish people once more gained access to 
the Wailing Wall, the Temple Mount, and the rest of the Old City of Jeru- 
salem. But this has been much less widely accepted. 


XXii » PREFACE 
Diaspora Jews to observe in any fashion. This may be a result of its intrinsic 
difficulty, or of the jarring juxtaposition between the lively spring and deadly 
memories. 
So this is a music of theme with variations. Looking at it from the years 
we live in, with the versions of the holidays we have, this is how the cycle 
appears: 
Rosh HasHANAH 
Yom Kippur 
SUKKOT 
SH’MINI ATZERET 
SIMCHAT TorAH—The joyful moment when the Torah reading ends and 
begins, and when we realize that Moses’ death leads straight to the 
Creation of the World. 
HANuKKAH—Dark of the moon (the twenty-fifth of Kislev) closest to the 
dark of the sun (winter solstice). Therefore, the darkest moment of the 
year—at which we light a growing number of candles to herald the 
return of light. We commemorate one of the darkest times of Jewish 
history—when not only was Antiochus, the Hellenistic king, defiling 
the Temple and insisting on our assimilation, but many Jews had joined 
the Hellenistic side; and then, at this dark point, the Maccabees turned 
the tide. We especially focus on the moment when, after political and 
military victory, came a moment of spiritual despair—when it seemed 
impossible to rededicate the Temple with but one bottle of sacred oil. At 
that moment, again, the Jews acted—used the oil against all reason— 
and were redeemed by a miracle. So Hanukkah at every level is about 
moving from dark despair to sowing seeds of light and hope. 
Tu B’Suvat—At the “new year of trees,” when the sap begins to rise in the 
trees of the Land of Israel, the seeds of light sown at Hanukkah show a 
glimmer of growth. We plant trees and hold a mystical Seder in which 
we eat four kinds of fruit and drink four kinds of wine, to renew the Tree 
of Life that sustains all life. 
Purim—The holiday of spring fever. We read in a bawdy, hilarious way the 
bawdy, hilarious story of Vashti and Esther, Haman and Mordechai. We 
read how the pompous fool, King Ahasuerus, decides that no woman 
will ever give him orders—and ends up taking orders from Queen Esther; 
how Haman decides to wipe out all the Jews—and thereby brings on the 
wipe-out of his family and his faction. We ridicule their efforts to be 
tyrants. We wear costumes, get drunk, make carnival—almost as if to 
get out of our systems the riotous emotions of early spring, in order to 
address the themes of liberation more profoundly in the Pesach Seder. 
PESACH 


PREFACE + XXIli 
CounTING THE OMeR—Climbing the 49 steps up from Mitzrayim (Egypt, but 
in Hebrew the root means narrow place or tight spot) to the height of 
Sinai (Shavuot, on the fiftieth day). During the omer we mourn the 
Holocaust, celebrate Israeli independence, and take a spirituai as well as 
material picnic for Lag B’Omer. 
SHAVUOT 
TisHa B’Av—Close to the summer solstice, feeling overwhelmed by the fire 
of the sun, we remember the burning of the First Temple by the 
Babylonians and of the second by the Roman legions. We fast so as to let 
ourselves feel the heat and thirst of the refugee, and we let ourselves feel 
the exhaustion and dryness that can follow any burst of creativity. 
And then we move to Rosh Hashanah. The sun cools down, the breezes 
help refresh us, we drink to ease the thirst that has dried us since mid- 
summer. We read of Abraham’s renewal from the wellspring of Beersheba, 
and we take ourselves to a nearby river on Rosh Hashanah afternoon. And so 
we enter the moon cycle that brings us out on Sh’mini Atzeret—on the verge 
of winter, ready to move into it more fully. Ready to experience the darkness 
fully, and to light the lights of Hanukkah. Ready to come full circle. 
This is the round of the year, the cycle all life lives through. What do we 
accomplish by acting out the cycle, using the symbols, telling the stories? 
Long ago our people believed that if we celebrated the cycle, the cycle 
was more likely to continue. The rains would come when they were due, the 
sun would shine more warmly in its season, the crops would grow—and die, 
and grow again. 
And if we celebrated the cycle, we believed, our deliverance from 
slavery would come again. The spiral of history would keep on circling 
upward if we lived through the spirals of our past. Someday the spiral would 
free us fully—with Messiah. 
And the cycle would also help us as individuals. It is intended to help us 
feel more deeply, more intensely, the cycle of feelings that make us fully 
human. We learn from these holy days that when it is time to grieve, we are 
to grieve deeply. When it is time to be angry, we should be furious. If it is time 
for happiness, we dance with joy. 
Jewish tradition does not encourage what is wishy-washy. It does en- 
courage us to know that all these emotions are part of human life—and that 
specific actions can make them clearer to ourselves. What we sing, what we 
eat, what we read, what we wear, how we move, what houses we live in—all 
can be channeled, focused, to clarify the whole range of our feelings. If we are 
able to feel these feelings deeply enough, we can “use them up.” Through 
walking the path of the year, we can renew in ourselves a sense of deep calm, 
internal harmony, the peaceful sense of shalom. 


XXIV +» PREFACE 
And there is one reason more to observe the cycle: from the beginning, 
the Jewish people have celebrated the festivals in order to honor the Unity 
that underlies all life. 
The very interweaving of the themes of history and nature, the human 
life cycle and moments of spiritual experience—remind us that in some sense 
all the realms of life are dancing with each other. The circles of the sun, and 
of the moon; of a single human life between the generations, and an entire 
people’s history of renewal; of every quiet act of newness, birth, creation—all 
are echoes of One Circle. 
Let us then join the circle and begin the dance. 


SEASONS OF OUR JOY 


—_— 
CHAIM 
The Shabbos before Rosh Hashanah, in final preparation for the New Year, 
we read in the Torah, “‘therefore choose life, that both you and your seed may 
live: that you may love the Lord your God."’ (Deut. 30:19) Life’s continuity is 
represented by the eighteen sheep. 


Kes CHAPTER ONE esg 
HEADING UP 
THE YEAR— 
ROSH HASHANAH 
Where does the circle start? When does the year begin? 
i ions, th two answers—and 
both of them are right. The year starts twice. 
One beginning is at Rosh Hashanah, which literally means head of the 
year. But Rosh Hashanah does not occur in what the Bible calls the first 
month. That month is Nisan, the month of spring—the month of Pesach, 
Passover. That is the month of which God spoke to Moses and Aaron: “This 
month shall be for you the head of months; it shall be for you the first of the 
months of the year” (Ex. 18:2). What is more, the spring month of Nisan is 
when the families of Jewish slaves in Egypt first saw themselves as the united 
Jewish people. it is the month of the beginning of their freedom, the month 
when God enters history and reshapes our tangible political and social life. So 
it is the new year for learning how the Jewish people can reach toward 
freedom in the world. 
And yet for 2,000 years and more, the Jewish people have celebrated the 
new year half a year after the month of Nisan. Rosh Hashanah comes in the 
month of Tishri, which the Bible calls the seventh month. It is the month of 
early fall, of catching our breath after the dry hot winds of summer. Because it 
is the seventh month, it echoes the seventh day, the Shabbos of rest and 
contemplation, of catching our breath after six days of hard work. 
So perhaps Rosh Hashanah is the new year for renewal. Like Shabbos it 
is the time to focus our attention on ultimate spiritual truth. This is then the 
new year for learning how a human being can turn toward God. Perhaps it is 
the head of the year because the head is raised toward heaven, away from the 
ara Wake 


2 ° SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
earth—while Pesach celebrates a more earthy liberation, the freedom of our 
bodies. Perhaps it is the new year because according to tradition it is the 
birthday of Adam, the celebration of the beginning of the whole human 
K _ race—while Pesach celebrates the beginning of the Jewish people. 
So the year begins twice—perhaps to teach us that we can never get 
started with a single, separated part of ourselves, with politics alone or spirit 
alone, with the Jewish people alone or the universal human being alone, the 
body alone or the head alone. We need both—always both—to begin. 
@332? ORIGINS 
Like all the holidays, Rosh Hashanah began with a fairly simple purpose 
and description in the Bible. From there, the Jewish people developed it, 
unfolded it, into a many-layered festival for meeting both spiritual and 
communal needs. The Book of Leviticus proclaims: “In the seventh month, 
in the first day of the month, there shall be a solemn rest for you, a sacred 
convocation commemorated with the blast of the ram’s horn. You shall not 
work at any of your ordinary labor, and you shall bring a fire-offering to the 
Lord” (Lev. 23:23-25). Here the important note seems to be that the 
seventh month (like the seventh day) is to have sabbatical overtones of 
solemn rest and ceasing work, with the shofar blast a special calling to this 
special Shabbos. The overtones are of renewal, not of newness; of refreshing 
the year, not of beginning it. The phrase “Rosh Hashanah” does not appear. 
By the time the Jews had suffered the destruction of the First Temple 
and had wept and sung their songs in Babylon, the first of Tishri took on a 
new meaning. The simple thread was woven, twirled, embroidered into a 
richer fabric of renewal. 
After their captivity in Babylon, part of the Jewish people returned to 
the Land of Israel under the leadership of the politician Nehemiah and the 
high priest Ezra. It was the first day of the seventh month (about 485 B.C.E.) 
that Ezra chose as the date on which to convoke the people to hear and 
understand the Torah, the core of Biblical teaching which many had forgot- 
ten. At “the broad space in front of the Water Gate,” they gathered to hear 
the priests and Levites read the scroll and explain the meaning of the more 
obscure passages. The people began to cry as they realized how far they were 
from living a life according to the Torah. But Ezra and the Levites told them 
to celebrate instead, “to eat rich food and drink sweet wine and share with 
whoever had none.” For the day was a holiday, and their rediscovery of 
Torah should be a joy to them. It was a day to change their lives and turn 
toward God—but not to mourn their past misdeeds. So the people celebrated 
“because they had understood the words that were declared to them” (Nehe- 
miah 7-8). 
Some scholars believe that deep in the background of this celebration at ee LOCH 
Ym cay ey IV US Ate 


ROSH HASHANAH - 3 
the Water Gate, this renewal of Israel’s knowledge of the covenant with 
God, stood a Babylonian holiday. Every year, according to this theory, the 
successful conclusion of the Babylonian harvest was an occasion for pledging 
renewed obedience to the Babylonian throne. Learning of this custom of the _ 
Babylonians either before the Exile or during it, the Jews both borrowed and 
transformed this coronation—lifted it on high to assert that only God is the 
true King, and that every year we recognize and celebrate God’s power. 
During the next several centuries—through the great upheavals of Hellenis- 
tic rule and Maccabean rebellion, Roman overlordship and the Destruction 
of the Second Temple, the Bar Kochba rebellion and the decimation of the 
Jewish population of Palestine—the Jewish community worked out what it 
meant to enthrone the King of Kings. 
By the time the existing practices of the Jewish people were organized 
and written down in the law-code of the Mishnah (about 200 C.E.), the 
rabbis had concluded that if the new moon of Tishri is when God again is 
crowned the King, then the new moon of Tishri is also when the King passes 
judgment upon the world, through either renewing life or passing sentence of 
death on human beings. There are other days of judgment as well: at 
Passover, the rabbis said, judgment is executed through plenty or scarcity of 
grain; at Shavuot, through plenty or scarcity of fruit; at Sukkot, through 
plenty or scarcity of rain. Each of these days of judgment is in some sense the 
beginning of the year. But the day of judgment for humans came to be 
understood not as a new year, but the new year: Rosh Hashanah. 
Once the rabbis had decided that the first of Tishri was the head of the 
year, they saw it as the key moment to establish the orderly procession of time 
and the orderly process of a decent human community. On the one hand, 
they worked out the rules of evidence for the sighting of a new moon and thus 
how to decide when a new month begins. On the other hand, they worked 
out the rules of order in the relationship among all those human beings who 
must obey God’s royal will toward justice. And linking these two—order in 
God’s time and order in our communities—the rabbis heard the call of the 
ram’s horn, the shofar. So the rabbis worked out in careful detail the order of 
blowing the horn that calls from God to humankind, from humankind to 
God. 
About 300 years after the law-code of the Mishnah had been written 
down, the rabbis brought together their own commentaries on the Mishnah 
into what then became known as the Talmud. By that time, the idea of 
obedience to God the King had been shaped into a powerful metaphor of the 
decent relationships that human beings owe each other. If all of us are 
subjects of the one transcendent King, then no earthly king or boss or 
overseer, no president or premier, can truly rule us. Then each of us owes the 
others the respect due to an equal—and the redress due to an equal whom we 
damage. Thus the rabbis wrote, “One is judged on Rosh Hashanah and one’s 
doom is sealed on Yom Kippur . . . Four things cross out the doom of a 


a ge 4 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
person: righteousness expressed through gifts of charity; prayerful supplica- 
NN tion; change of name; and change of conduct.” 
tk Three of these actions—righteousness in giving; prayer; and decent 
\) S conduct—are mentioned in ‘heaRoshpliasiadahare yeaudeateiseneand 
. @ have become the keys to our experience of Rosh Hashanah. The Talmud 
reminds us that the fourth one, change of name, goes back all the way to 
Sarah, foremother of all the Jews, whose name was changed by God. This 
method of averting doom was dropped out of the Rosh Hashanah prayers— 
perhaps because the rabbis came to feel it was too easy to change one’s name 
rather than one’s life path. Or perhaps they felt it was God’s prerogative to 
change a person’s name—or essence. But a few traditionally minded modern 
Jews who see their names as an index to their deepest identities have been 
encouraged by this passage to reconsider their names on the occasion of Rosh 
Hashanah—and indeed sometimes to rename themselves that day, by asking 
to be called up to the Torah by a new name. 
For a much larger section of the Jewish community, the Rosh Hashanah 
period provides a strong stimulus for undertaking the other three transforma- 
tions—remaking their lives, refreshing their charity, and reconnecting with 
their spiritual roots. 
It is the Talmud that gives the metaphor of the Book of Life to Jewish 
tradition: “Three books are opened on Rosh Hashanah: one for the thorough- 
ly wicked, one for the thoroughly righteous, and one for those in-between. 
The thoroughly righteous are immediately inscribed definitively in the Book 
of Life; the thoroughly wicked are immediately inscribed definitively in the 
Book of Death; the destiny of those in-between is suspended from Rosh 
Hashanah till Yom Kippur. If they do well, they are inscribed in the Book of 
Life; if they do not do well, they are inscribed in the Book of Death.” 
And thus the Talmud makes an teakable bridge of the Ten Days 
from Rosh Hashanah to Yom Kippur; the he Nee ee 
Aseret Y’mai Tshuvah or Ten Days of Return and Repentance. The bridge 
goes upward toward God and outward toward each other. From the time of 
the Talmud on, Jewish communities have celebrated Rosh Hashanah accord- 
ing to the Talmud’s pattern. We have addressed our misdeeds, changed our ways of living, and lifted our eyes to the King. During the intervening 
centuries, the service has been enriched by many piyyutim (poems), and one 
entirely new ceremony, Tashlich, has been added on the afternoon of Rosh Hashanah. (We shall discuss it later.) But the basic mood and intention have 
not changed. 
@23> ELUL: MAKING READY «eem 
Rosh Hashanah does not burst in upon us. From ancient tradition, the entire month of Elul, the month before Tishri, is a time of rethinking, study, 


ROSH HASHANAH - 5 
and self-examination leading toward the Rosh Hashanah-Yom Kippur 
period. Elul became a special time in the ancient Jewish community of 
Babylonia after the destruction of the Second Temple, during the period of 
the writing of the Talmud (100-500 C.E.). The custom grew up that during 
Elul, ordinary Jews—not just the scholars and rabbis—would take time out 
from their work to join in study groups to read the Bible and rethink their 
lives. As an explanation for this custom, the Jewish communities looked back 
to the earliest of all the reconciliations between God and the Jewish 
people. 
Elul is thirty days long, and Yom Kippur is the tenth day of Tishri. So 
there are forty days from the first day of Elul to Yom Kippur. These forty days 
became identified with the forty days of repentance Moses spent on Mount 
Sinai. Moses had come ASNT TORE MGI ICNHESTER Gonttnindractic only 
to find the people worshipping the golden calf. He destroyed the calf and 
punished the people, and then returned to Sinai to fast and pray for forty 
days. These ended—presumably on Yom Kippur—with God’s act of forgive- 
ness and reconciliation in handing down the second set of tablets with the 
Ten Commandments. And so Israel’s first collective sin was covered over by 
the first atonement. By identifying this period of Moses’ forty days on the 
mountain with the period before Yom Kippur, the community encouraged 
itself to spend these forty days as Moses did—in prayerful study and in trying 
to hear God’s word and turn their lives around, so that God could again 
extend a full forgiveness. 
How to mark these forty days? The Jews of Babylonia created two main 
customs. One was that the shofar would be blown every morning of Elul, 
except Shabbos and the last day of the month. This horn blast was a spiritual 
alarm in itself, reminding people to bestir their souls. It was also a way of 
pointing toward the shofar-blowing on Rosh Hashanah. 
On Shabbos it was omitted for reasons on two levels: first, it was feared 
that the desire to blow the shofar would be so intense, so consuming, that 
people would forget or ignore the prohibition against carrying an object from 
a private to a public domain during Shabbos and would carry the shofar from 
home to shul; secondly, translating this legal caution into its spiritual ana- 
logue, blowing the shofar, even on Rosh Hashanah itself, was felt to be the 
kind of disturbance of the order of the universe that ought not to be done on 
the contemplative day of Shabbos. And the last day of Elul was omitted to 
leave a space between the reminder and the reality. 
The second custom was that at every service during Elul, Psalm 27 
would be read. It is a plea to God for help when we are beset by enemies 
around us. But reading it before and after Rosh Hashanah, we may well 
understand it as a plea for help in dealing with the enemies within us— 
enemies of our own true selves who seek to frighten or seduce us away from 
our own true paths: 


6 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
FOR DAVID: 
The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? 
The Lord is the stronghold of my life; of whom shall I be terrified? 
In my very guts came evil to gnaw and consume me, 
But these my troubles, my enemies, stumbled and fell. 
Though an army encamp against me, my heart will not fear; 
Though war rise up against me, even then I will keep faith. 
One thing only have I asked the Lord; one thing only will I seek— 
That I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, 
To see the Lord’s pleasantness and to visit in His temple. 
For He hides me in His sukkah on the day of evil, 
He conceals me in the concealment of His tent. 
He lifts me up upon a rock. 
And now my head will be uplifted—above my enemies all around about 
me, 
And in His tent | will offer offerings with a shofar-blast; 
I will sing and chant praise to the Lord. 
Hear my voice, O Lord, when I call! 
Give me grace and answer me! 
It was on Your behalf that my heart said, “Seek My face!” 
It is Your face, O Lord, that I will seek. 
Do not conceal Your face from me, 
Do not, in your anger set Your servant aside. 
You have been my help before; 
Do not now cast me off—do not desert me!— 
O God of my salvation. 
Even if my father and mother desert me, 
The Lord will gather me together. 
Teach me your path, O Lord; 
And lead me on a smooth and well-kept road— 
Because there are those who lie in ambush for me. 
Do not hand me over to the will of my adversaries, 
For lying witnesses have arisen against me—whose every breath does 
violence. 
If 1 had not kept trusting that I would see the Lord’s goodness, 
While I was still in the land of the living! . . . 
Wait for the Lord; 
Be strong, and let your heart take courage; 
Wait for the Lord. 


ROSH HASHANAH - 7 
The passage that begins “One thing only” has become, in Hebrew, a 
song to a tune that catches the spirit of Elul: 
Achat sha-alti mey-eyt Adonai o-tah ah-va-keysh 
Shivti b’veyt Adonai kol y’mei chayai 
Lachazot b’no-am, b’no-am Adonai u’l’vakeyr b’haychalo 
As Elul draws toward its close, we take the final steps in preparing for 
Rosh Hashanah. Beginning on the Sunday before Rosh Hashanah (or if Rosh 
Hashanah begins on Monday or Tuesday, on the second Sunday before the 
holiday), special prayers for forgiveness—Slichot—are recited for the morning 
service. Since according to tradition the heavens are most open to prayer at 
midnight, the custom has arisen to gather at midnight on the Saturday night 
before Rosh Hashanah, to begin this period of Slichot, which then pauses for 
Rosh Hashanah and continues in the week between Rosh Hashanah and 
Yom Kippur. 
The Slichot service is built upon an ancient invocation of God’s grace 
and a recitation of the thirteen merciful attributes that God revealed (Ex. 
33:21-34:7) in the cleft of the rock to Moses—both of these specified as early 
as the Talmud—and the chanting of a number of psalms and prayerful poems 
(piyyutim) composed through the course of Jewish history. 
The invocation reminds God (and ourselves) of God’s past acts of 
loving-kindness in response to human prayer and need: 
The One Who answered Abraham on Mount Moriah—He will answer 
us, 
The One Who answered his son Isaac, bound upon the altar—He will 
answer us. 
The One Who answered Jacob, at Beth El— 
The One Who answered Joseph, bound in prison— 
The One Who answered our forebears at the Sea of Reeds— 
The One Who answered Moses when Sinai rose up like a sword— 
The One Who answered Aaron when he brought sin-offering— 
The One Who answered Pinchas in the midst of the congregation— 
The One Who answered Joshua at Gilgal— 
The One Who answered Samuel at Mitzpah— 
The One Who answered David and Solomon in Jerusalem— 
The One Who answered Elijah on Mount Carmel— 
The One Who answered Elisha at Jericho— 
The One Who answered Jonah in the belly of the fish— 
The One Who answered Hezekiah in his sickness— 
The One Who answered Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah in the fiery 
furnace— 
The One Who answered Daniel in the lions’ den— 


8 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
The One Who answered Mordechai and Esther in Shushan— 
The One Who answered Ezra in the Exile— 
The One Who answered all the righteous and the merciful, the whole- 
hearted and the upright—He will answer us. 
The congregation calls back to God the Merciful Name that God called 
out to Moses: 
Adonai, Adonai, el rachum v’chanun, erech apayim v’rav chesed 
v’emet, notzayr chesed |’alafim, nosey avon vafeshah v’chatah-ah 
v'nakey. 
The Lord, the Lord, God of motherly compassion Who offers grace and 
is slow to anger, Who is full of loving-kindness and trustworthiness, 
Who assures love for a thousand generations, Who forgives iniquity, 
transgression, and misdeed, and Who grants pardon. 
And the congregation reminds God of His response when Moses begged, 
“Forgive—please! the people for their sin” . . . And the Lord said, “I have 
forgiven—in accordance with your plea” (Num. 14:19-20). 
The tone of the whole service is set in Psalm 130: “Out of the depths | 
call to You; O Lord, hear my cry, heed my plea. . . Who could endure it, O 
Lord, if you kept count of every sin? But forgiveness is Yours; therefore we 
revere You.” 
In this way, throughout the Slichot period, the congregation recognizes 
that the root of all reconciliation is in the Root of Being. But the tradition 
teaches that remorse toward God can bring forgiveness only for those hurts 
that we have done toward God alone. Wherever we have hurt another 
human being, we must try to make some redress for the harm we have done. 
And we must seek forgiveness from the people we have hurt. So among many 
chavurot and an increasing number of synagogues, the first midnight of Slichot 
has become a time for friends, neighbors, and members of the community to 
come together to face what harms they have done to each other, to apologize 
and try to make redress for those hurts, and to seek each others’ forgiveness. 
Some congregations have prayed and sung together, and then sat in serious 
silence while they collected their thoughts about their misdeeds and quietly 
sought each other out. Then they have tried to straighten out in private 
conversation what had gone wrong between them in the previous year. 
Finally, it is during Elul—and especially the day before Rosh Hasha- 
nah—that many Les visit amnily graves and give tzedakalr Wightsoumes toward those in need—therefore, contributions to charity). Thus by re- membering the dead and facing death, the community acknowledges the 
death of its old self so that a new self can be born; makes more intense its experience of the sweetness of life; and renews its commitment to bring even the dead into the bond of life—through memory. 


JEWAM GAWS YEAW 
At Ne eee 
ROSH HASHANAH - 9 
THE ROSH HASHANAH eet 
SERVICES 
Rosh Hashanah comes on the first two days of Tishri, the month 
connected with the fall equinox. It may fall in the Western months of 
September or early October. The calendar is so arranged that the first day of 
Rosh Hashanah is never allowed to fall on a Sunday, Wednesday, or Friday. 
This is done so that Yom Kippur, ten days later, will never come on a Friday 
or Sunday—that is, immediately before or immediately after Shabbos. Many 
Reform Jews celebrate Rosh Hashanah for one day only, the first day of 
Tishri. In Israel, however, it is the only holiday that Israeli Jews celebrate for 
two days. ° 
Rosh Hashanah, like all Jewish days and thus all holy days, begins at 
sunset. So at dusk of the first evening of the festival, the families and 
friendship groups of the community gather in their homes, in an atmosphere 
of joyful awe and expectation, to light the candles that begin each festival 
and to say Sheh-hechianu, the blessing that is always recited when we do 
something new or something we have not done for a long time, praising God 
for filling us with life to bring us to this moment of renewal: 
Baruch atah Adonai elohenu melech ha-olam asher kid’shanu b’mitz- 
votav vitzivanu l’hadlik ner shel yomtov ... Baruch attah Adonai 
elohenu melech ha-olam sheh-hechianu v’ki-imanu v’higianu lazman 
hazeh. 
Blessed be You, Lord Our God, Ruler of all space-time, who made us 
holy by your commandments and commanded us to light a candle for 
the holy day. Blessed be You, Lord Our God, Ruler of all space-time, 
who has given us life, has lifted us up, and has brought us to this season. 
And then, in their millions, the many different kinds of Jews go 
trooping off to their many different versions of the House of Prayer. To 
cathedral-like synagogues with formally dressed Western men and women 
going together to their pews. To storefront shtiebels of Chassidim with furry 
shtreimels on their heads, nodding goodbye as their wives climb up to rickety 
balconies. To Sephardic mosque-like buildings colored in pastels and scat- 
tered up and down the hills of S’fad in Israel. To living rooms in rented 
houses and apartments where intimate participatory congregations or chavur- 
ot, fellowships as they call themselves, encourage women and men to take off 
their shoes, find a cushion on the floor, and even to watch a baby crawl 
between the prayerbooks. 
So the myriads of Jews—most of them dressed in some specially fine or 
*For a discussion of the reasons for celebration of one day or two days of holiday 
by different Jews, see Appendix I. 


10 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
joyful clothing, some of them in white for Rosh Hashanah, flock to their 
prayers, come to see the Torah and the Holy Ark themselves draped in white 
covers that will stay till Yom Kippur. “Though your sins be as scarlet, they 
shall be as white as snow.” 
And in all these Houses of Prayer, there is some version of the Machzor, 
a special prayerbook for the festivals and especially for Rosh Hashanah and 
Yom Kippur. Where the ordinary daily prayerbook is called a Siddur, an order 
of service, V/ eans cycle. Today the Jews are concerned not with what 
is ordinary-but with what is extraordinary, with the first curve of the year that 
will curve from festival to festival through differences—and only after a year’s 
time will bring them back around the cycle to where they began. 
And so they begin the first service of the holy day—the evening service. 
It is fairly brief, not much different from the regular evening service except 
that the melody of the Hebrew chanting is extraordinary—filled with awe, 
celebration, and triumph. In a number of the prayers, praise of the holy God 
is replaced by praise of the holy King. There is a Royal musical motif: 
The Rosh Hashanah liturgy varies in several other ways from the regular 
evening service. Just after the prayer Hashkiveynu, Lay us down in peace, the 
congregation proclaims: “Tiku bachodesh shofar bakeseh I’yom chageynu; ki 
chok l’yisrael hu, mishpat l’eylohai yaakov. Sound the shofar on the new 
moon, at the time appointed for our feast day; for it is a statute for Israel, a 
judgment for the God of Jacob.” Then in the amidah (the standing, mur- 
mured prayer), we add the paragraph that greets all the festivals with a plea 
for God to remember our past efforts and our future hopes, our holy city 
Jerusalem and our whole widespread people, so as to stir in us and toward us 
new life, loving-kindness and fulfillment—even Messianic fulfillment. On 
this particular festival, our plea for remembrance is underlined by our naming 
the day Yom Hazikkaron, the Day of Remembrance. We add to several of the 
amidah prayers the reminder that God should remember to write us into 
the Book of Life: “Zachreynu I’chaim melech chafeytz bachaim; v’chatveynu 
basefer hachaim !’ma-ancha elohim chaim. Remember us for life, O King 
who delights in life. Write us in the Book of Life—for your own sake, God of life.” 
And in the amidah we meet for the first time a refrain that will recur throughout Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur: the three paragraphs 
“Uv'chen, And therefore,” which ask God's help in evoking from us a tesponse to Rosh Hashanah that is three-fold—universally human, com- munally Jewish, and individually personal: 


ROSH HASHANAH - ]] 
And therefore, Lord our God, cause all that You created to remember 
fully all that You have done; cause all Your creatures to revere Your 
doings and to tremble in Your presence; cause them all to act as one to 
do Your will wholeheartedly. For we know, Lord our God, that the 
strength of Your hand, the power of Your right arm, and the awesome- 
ness of Your Name rule over all! creation. 
And therefore, Lord, give honor to Your people, praise to those who 
revere You, hope to those who seek You, confidence to those who 
await You, joy to Your land and gladness to Your city, triumph to the 
horn of David Your servant and light to the lamp of Messiah, child of 
Jesse—speedily and in our own day. 
And, therefore, the righteous will see and be glad, the upright rejoice, 
and the faithfully loving celebrate in song while evil is silenced and all 
wickedness vanishes like smoke—for You will erase the tyranny of 
arrogance from the earth. 
These three paragraphs were written by Rabbi Yochanan ben Nuri 
during the worst Roman repression of the Jewish people and of Torah. The 
tyranny of arrogance whose removal from the earth they prophesy was indeed 
the Roman Empire. But in a broader sense, the prayer rejects the false unity 
that could be imposed upon the human race by any tyranny, and celebrates 
instead the unity of a free humankind in which every people and each person 
is ready to follow only God as King. 
With these special Rosh Hashanah interpolations, especially those in- 
voking a Royal God, the evening service leads us through the front door of a 
royal palace that is built of ceremony and prayer, approaching closer and 
closer to the Royal Throne. As soon as the service is over, the congregation 
pauses in its progress toward the Throne room, pauses to celebrate the 
Coronation in more earthy fashion, with some food and drink. The congre- 
gants make the festival kiddush over wine, followed by Sheh-hechianu, the 
blessing ““Who has given us life,” in order again to honor the newness of the 
year. They dip slices of bread from a round challah into honey and recite 
the blessings over bread. They dip a slice of apple into honey, recite the 
blessing over fruit, and add: “Y’hi ratzon milfanechah Adonai elohenu 
velohai avotenu (or horenu) shet-chadesh alenu shanah tovah oomtukah. 
May it be Your will, our God and God of our fathers (or forebears), to renew 
for us a good, sweet year.” The round challah and the round apple represent 
the roundness and fullness of the year—or perhaps the Crown of God the 
King. (Or perhaps the roundness of the year and the roundness of the Crown 
are the same thing. Perhaps God’s very Crown is the cycle of the year.) 
Then people go home to have Rosh Hashanah dinner in families or 
small groups. Many of them invite guests to join them, so as to fulfill anew 
what our people did in the days of Ezra, 2,500 years ago, on the first Rosh 


Mi 
12 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Hashanah that we have a description of: “Eat rich food and drink sweet wine, 
and share with whoever has none.” (Some special Rosh Hashanah recipes are 
given at the end of this chapter. ) 
As the community gathers again in the morning at synagogue and 
shtiebel, chavurah and temple, we are face to face with solemn joy. A strange 
and special mood that is at once profound and exalted, deep and high, takes 
over. As the service begins, the sense of expectancy grows. Suddenly there is 
a triumphant shout of Hamelech!—“O King!” and Avinu Malkenu, “Our 
Parent, Our King,” becomes a vigorous imploring prayer: “Our Parent, Our 
King, reach out to us with grace even though we have not done enough to 
deserve grace; act toward us with gentle righteousness and with loving- 
kindness—so as to save us.” 
Avinu malkenu choneinu va-aneinu, ki ein banu ma:asim. 
Asei imanu tzedakah vachesed. Asei imanu tzedakah vachesed, 
v’hoshi-einu. iy) Un Aer Uy, | Wy epantan ce, een 
The sense of sorrow, fear, and awe become mixed with joy. Even as we 
face our own transgressions, we can feel joy; joy in knowing there is a Judge 
ho cares about transgressions, a Justice to which we are responsible in the 
first place. And joy in knowing that the Judge is full of motherly and fatherly 
compassion. What would our world be like if there were no justice in it? And 
what would our world be like if there were only strict justice in it, no 
forebearance, mercy, or compassion? 
BIBLE READINGS 
On every Rosh Hashanah morning in every House of Prayer, there 
comes a moment to pause from calling out to God, and hear some of God’s 
most troubling words to us—by reading Torah. In every House of Prayer the 
reading is the same, though the ways of reading and understanding it are 
different. In some, the rabbi will expound upon the reading in a sermon. In 
some, the chant of reading is itself enough. In some chavurot the community 
may break up for half an hour or so into clusters of three or four people, who 
talk about how the readings can be understood and their teachings applied in 
daily life. 
Whichever form of Torah-reading a particular congregation uses, it will 
have to deal with two hard stories. In the first day’s reading, Abraham sends 
his son Ishmael out of the family into the desert, almost to die; in the second 
day’s reading, Abraham carries off his other son, Isaac, almost to kill him. 
(Reform congregations, since they celebrate only one day of Rosh Hashanah, 
have chosen the Isaac story as the Torah reading.) These stories begin at the intimate level of the family, but raise the most basic issues of the universe. 
Let us hear them first as family tales. Abraham’s first wife Sarah has been barren till she conceived in her old age. His second wife, Hagar, has already 


ROSH HASHANAH + ]3 
borne him a son named Ishmael. And now the Rosh Hashanah readings 
begin... 
On the first day, the Torah reading is Genesis 21. Isaac, whose name 
means Laughing Boy, is born to the tune of Abraham’s and Sarah’s joyful 
laughter. But the displaced son Ishmael upsets Sarah by mockingly laughing 
at Isaac, so Sarah demands that Hagar and Ishmael be sent away, and God 
tells Abraham to agree. Hagar and Ishmael are expelled into the desert at 
Beersheba, and cry out to God when they are about to die of thirst. God hears 
them and reveals a well that saves their lives. Abraham and a neighboring 
king fall into conflict over possession of some wells and finally settle it by 
assigning Abraham a well at Beersheba. The readings also include Numbers 
29:1-6 (the description of what special sacrifices to offer at the Temple 
on Rosh Hashanah) and I Samuel 1:1—2:10 (the birth of the Prophet 
Samuel). 
On the second day of Rosh Hashanah, the Biblical readings begin with 
Genesis 22, in which God calls upon Abraham to sacrifice the very son Isaac 
for whose sake he has sent Ishmael and Hagar away. Abraham prepares to do 
so and has reached the point of binding Isaac and raising the knife when God 
intervenes to stop him and rescue Isaac. Abraham then sacrifices a ram as a 
substitute for Isaac. (According to a tradition of the ancient rabbis, one horn 
of this ram became the shofar God blew at Mount Sinai to introduce the 
giving of the Ten Commandments, and the other horn will be used to 
announce the coming of Messiah.) The other Bible readings for the second 
day are the passage from Numbers that describes the Rosh Hashanah sacri- 
fice, and Jeremiah 31:1—20, which tells how the people of Israel will be saved 
from disaster and exile, like a suffering child saved by his mother’s tears. 
These are not abstract statements of theology and theory, these tales. 
They are heart-rending, painful stories of a family—stories that tear at the 
hearts of children and of grown-ups who remember being children, tear at the 
hearts of husbands and wives, mothers and fathers, and of all who imagine 
that they may be. Thousands of powerful sermons have over thousands of 
years, in thousands of Jewish communities and congregations, been preached 
upon them. Hundreds of congregations have grappled with them. Some have 
even tried to enter the stories not only in their minds but also in their bodies. 
In one such effort, pairs of congregants acted out the roles—one of Abraham 
raising the knife, the other of Isaac watching it flash above him. The 
congregants flinched, shuddered, and then tried to share their feelings. 
Another chavurah passed out dozens of small mirrors and asked everyone to 
puff a breath onto the mirror till it turned cloudy—then watch the mirror 
clear and the faces return, puff again and watch themselves become distorted. 
Was that what Ishmael did to Isaac—reflect his identity in a clouded mirror? 
These two sets of readings are rich with associations for Rosh Hashanah. 
One is that together they tell the story of the birth, binding, and redemption 
of Isaac—the prototype of Jewish suffering and readiness to die for the sake of 


14 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
»» 
God. “For the sake of Isaac’s suffering, forgive our misdeeds!” say the Rosh 
Hashanah prayers. 
But the rabbis who chose what passages to read on Rosh Hashanah did 
not need to include the story of Ishmael. That they did may suggest to us 
another theme: that Abraham was ready to obey God’s command to send 
both his sons to death—and only God’s intervention at the last moment 
saved them. Since the Rosh Hashanah season is concerned with tshuvah, 
repenting and turning our lives back to the path of decency, we may wonder 
whether these two stories are about God’s tshuvah in regard to Ishmael and 
Isaac. Ten days later we will read how God turned back from the brink of 
destroying the city of Nineveh when Nineveh tured away from its corrup- 
tion; but in these Rosh Hashanah readings, the question of God’s change of 
mind is even more profound because Ishmael and Isaac are not described as 
seriously corrupt. 
The stories raise so many questions about the nature of good and evil, 
power and love, stubbornness and change, that any celebration of Rosh 
Hashanah would gain from reading the stories aloud and examining these 
questions: 
* Did Ishmael have to leave because in laughing at Laughing Boy he 
became too much like Isaac—imitating and clouding his very identity so that 
for each of them to grow up on his own they had to grow up separate? 
* According to tradition Ishmael was the forebear of the Arab peoples 
and Isaac of the Jews. What does this teach us about the identities of the 
Arabs and the Jews? Of other peoples, of siblings, of every human being 
within his/her own self? 
* Does the older brother, the more powerful partner, have to be defeated 
if the younger, the weaker, is to become free? How can there be a reconcilia- 
tion later? 
* Why did Abraham accept in silence the command to sacrifice Isaac? 
Because he felt utter faith in God, was ready to give up all he owned and 
believed for the sake of his relationship with God? Or because he decided to 
test once and for all whether this God that he had followed was a murderer or 
not? Or because the command accorded with his own deep desire to kill 
Isaac? Was Abraham a virtuoso of faith, or was he walking the knife-edge of 
despair? 
* What does it mean that Hagar, the banished wife, has a much fuller 
relationship with God than Sarah does? Can we pierce the veil upon the text 
to learn the histories, the feelings, the teachings of these women in these 
stories? 
* Why is Abraham in conflict with his neighbors over water until 
Ishmael and Hagar are sent their well of water? Why are both their well and 
Abraham’s well in Beersheba? 
In connection with these two readings from the Five Books of Moses, the rabbis assigned two readings from the Prophets. One of them (I Samuel 


ROSH HASHANAH -: 15 
1-2:10) parallels the story of the birth of Isaac with the story of the birth of 
the prophet Samuel. It describes the poignant prayer of the barren Hannah 
that she become pregnant, and her joyful prayer when Samuel is born. In that 
prayer and in Hannah’s willingness to offer Samuel to God’s special service in 
the Sanctuary, the Prophetic passage may be seen as providing an answer to 
the dilemma of the sacrifice of Isaac: how can | make an offering to God, 
even of my son, without killing him? On the second day, the Prophetic 
reading (Jeremiah 31:1-20) places God in the situation of a loving parent 
trying to correct and restore a beloved wayward child—the people Israel. 
With the help of Mother Rachel, God comes to understand the need of 
reconciliation between the parent and the child. Thus both passages teach 
about the process of a change of heart, on earth as well as Heaven. 
After we return the Torah to the Ark, as morning wanes and we are 
about to shift from the end of the regular morning service into the musaf or 
additional service, two members of the congregation come forward to carry 
out the Biblical command of blowing the ram’s horn. One of them will call 
out the notes in a low tone, to free the other—who will actually blow the 
shofar—from dividing his/her attention between the horn and the prayer- 
book. The caller may well cover his/her head with a prayer shawl in order to 
concentrate his own attention, and then calls the three names of the three 
different tones that evoke a cry am: wail of sorrow,)and the sobs of 
Gas (If the first day of Rosh Hashanah falls on a Shabbos, we wait till 
the second day to blow the shofar.) As we move from awe toward joy, three 
special sections are added to the murmured standing prayer that is at the 
heart of the regular service. These are about Kingship, Remembrance, and 
Shofar notes. They represent God’s power in the present, past, and future: 
The power God gives us to make fresh every living present moment; 
The power God gives us to remember, sorrow over, and forgiv VY 
ourselves and others the mistakes we have made in the past; 
And the power God gives us to imagine and transform the future. 
For each of these sections, ten verses from different parts of the Bible are 
read out—three from the Five Books of Moses, three from the Prophets, three 
from the Holy Writings, and one from the Five Books again. Thus for 
Kingship, for Remembrance, and for Shofar notes, a minyan of verses comes 
together, as if this quorum is necessary for the three aspects of God’s power to 
be present. And for each of these three the shofar is sounded. 
THE SHOFAR 
The soundings of the shofar fulfill the special command of the Torah to 
make the new moon of Tishri into a day of sounding the horn. The shofar is, 
indeed, the special symbol of Rosh Hashanah. 


16 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
It is blown in three separate ways: 
Tekiah, one long blast of alarm. 
Shevarim, three medium blasts like wailing—so the length of one whole 
shevarim is the same as the length of one whole tekiah. 
Teruah, nine short blasts like broken sobs—altogether, the length of 
shevarim. 
The sound of the shofar is so wild, so eerie, so untuned, that over the 
millennia it has inspired hundreds of explanations. Here are several that may 
lead our ears and minds in various directions: 
- The three equal but different sounds may be seen as the surfaces of a 
mystical cube in time rather than space. Since the Holy of Holies in the 
ancient Temple in Jerusalem was a cube, perhaps the shofar sounds are a 
translation of it into the medium of time. 
* A ninth-century Babylonian teacher, Saadia Gaon, taught that there 
were ten reasons that the Holy One commanded us to blow the shofar on 
Rosh Hashanah: 
1) Just as earthly kings have horns and trumpets blown to celebrate the 
anniversary of their coronation, so God wants the shofar blown on the 
anniversary of the Creation—when there came to be a world that God could 
rule over. 
2) Just as earthly kings have horns and trumpets blown to announce 
their decrees—and only after this warning actually enforce the decree—so 
God wants the shofar blown to announce the beginning of the Ten Days of 
Return, when all are commanded to turn their lives around. 
3) Just as the shofar blew when God gave the Torah at Mount Sinai, so 
it blows to remind us each year to do as our forebears said at Sinai: “We will 
act and we will hearken.” 
4) Just as Ezekiel compared the words of the Prophets, calling for the 
people to change their ways, to a shofar—so we must know that those who 
ear the shofar and do not take warning and change their lives will be 
coe for their own destruction. 
5) Because the shofar was blown as a war-alarm when the Temple was 
destroyed, it should remind us of the destruction of the Temple—the disaster 
that we brought upon ourselves—and thus should warn us to abandon our 
misdeeds in order to avert disaster. 
6) Because God used a ram as a substitute sacrifice for Isaac, the ram’s 
horn should remind us how Isaac and Abraham were prepared to give up all their hopes and dreams for God’s sake. 
7) Since the blowing of a hor causes cities to tremble, so the shofar will make us tremble and fear our Creator. 
8) Since the shofar will be blown on the great day of judgment, blowing it now reminds us that every day is a day of judgment. 


ROSH HASHANAH - 17 
9) Since the shofar will be blown when the tempest-tossed of the Jewish 
people are gathered in harmony to the Land of Israel, we should hear the 
shofar to stir our longings for that day. 
10) Since the shofar will be blown when Messiah revives the dead, we 
hear the shofar in order to revive our faith in that supernal transformation, 
the final victory of life and freedom over death, the ultimate oppressor. 
» Along with Saadia’s teaching, based on a deep knowledge of tradition, 
there is another that teaches an emotional truth beyond tradition: Once the 
great Chassidic rebbe, the Baal Shem Tov, instructed a shofar blower in the 
mystical meanings of the shofar blasts. But the blower forgot them on Rosh 
Hashanah and broke down in tears. The Baal Shem Tov told him that 
the mystical meanings were like keys to the many doors of Heaven. But if the 
keys are lost, all the doors can be broken open by an axe. And so the 
heart-broken burst of tears can break down all the barriers between ourselves 
and God. The shofar’s untuned wail, its sobbing, is that burst of human tears. 
- When the caller stands beside the shofar blower on Rosh Hashanah 
and in a low voice calls out the notes the blower is to sound, it is easy to hear 
the human voice say ‘“Tekiah—Alarm note!” and to hear the reply of shofar 
blast as the eerie voice of God. Coming not from a man-made silver trumpet, 
but from the unplanned twists and turns of the ram’s horn. Sounding not a 
tuneful melody, but the unmusical outburst of alarm and grief from Heaven. 
If we cry out, the Holy One will answer; but the answer is a crying-out toward 
us. 
And the outcry comes full circle. As the Machzor says, “The great shofar 
is sounded—and a still small voice is heard.” Ours. And God’s. For an instant 
fused into a single silence. 
MUSAF 
In many congregations, the musaf or additional service on Rosh Hasha- 
nah and Yom Kippur begins with an extraordinary personal prayer called 
‘‘Hineni, Here | am”—the answer that Abraham gives when summoned by 
God and that Isaac gives when summoned by Abraham. The prayer was 
composed by an unknown East European cantor, who as he began to chant 
aloud the repetition of the amidah paused to plead in moving tones and 
language that God overlook his own failings of conduct and of voice, of 
memory, and of devotion—and respond with forgiveness to the needs and 
failings of the whole congregation. “Blessed are You, Who hears prayer,” the 
cantor ends, with a simplicity that goes beyond the usual laudatory names 
applied to God. And thus the cantor—who is presumed to be as nearly 
unblemished in ethical and ritual sensitivity as anyone could be, the better to 
be a channel for the congregation’s highest yearnings—becomes in this very 
imperfection a representative of the imperfect congregation, and in this very 
pleading, a representative of their own hopes. 


18 » SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
As the congregation moves deeper into the amidah, the imagery of the 
Books of Life and Death becomes overwhelming in the Un’taneh tokef: 
On Rosh Hashanah it is written and on Yom Kippur it is sealed: 
How many shall be crossed out 
And how many shall be created; 
Who shall live and who shall die. . . 
Who by fire and who by water, 
Who by sword and who by beast. . . 
Who shall be rested in his home (yanu-ach) and 
Who shall be wrested from his home (yanu-ah). . . 
BUT REPENTANCE, PRAYER, AND ACTS OF GENTLE RIGH- 
TEOUSNESS CAN CROSS OUT THE SEVERITY OF THE DE- 
CREE. 
B’Rosh Hashanah yika-teyvun 
U’v yom Tzom Kippur yey-cha-teymun 
Kama ya-avurun v’Kama yibarey-un 
Mi yichiyeh u’mi yamut. . . 
U'tshuvah u’tfilah u’tzedakah 
Maz-avirin et ro-a hag’zerah. 
And as the chanting continues, poem after poem celebrates the King 
Whose triumph will someday encompass all the earth: 
All the world shall serve You, and praise Your glorious name 
And Your righteousness triumphant all humankind acclaim 
And all their congregations so loud Your praise shall sing 
That the uttermost peoples, hearing, shall hail You crowned King. 
In the Rosh Hashanah amidah, we recite one of the most well-known 
prayers of the daily service, Alenu. Indeed, Rosh Hashanah is the time for which it was originally created. It was intended by one of the great rabbis of 
the Talmud, Rav, to introduce the Kingship section of the Rosh Hashanah 
amidah. That is why the Alenu refers again and again to God as triumphant 
ruler, to Whom we owe our loyalty beyond all earthly kings and institutions. 
Indeed, on Rosh Hashanah, as the congregation says, “To You we bend the 
knee,” the leader—and in some synagogues and chavurot, the whole con- gregation—actually kneels and bows their heads toward the ground. This act—in a community which otherwise never kneels, proudly asserting that its devotion to the God of freedom is too deep to permit servility toward Him—is a powerful way to embody the Rosh Hashanah theme of God's Kingship. 


ROSH HASHANAH - 19 
Uniting the sense of Coronation with the sense of Creation—for the 
Ruler of all space-time becomes King at the moment the kingdom comes into 
being—the amidah continues, “Hayom harat olam. Today the world was 
conceived, today there stand in judgment all the creatures of the universe.” 
Thus the service echoes the traditional assertion that the human race—the 
original Adam—was created on the first of Tishri, so that Rosh Hashanah is 
the day of God’s Kingship because it is the day on which the Image of God 
was first stamped upon the coins of the realm: the varied human beings. And 
so, the Machzor points out: 
Hayom ta-amtzeynu . . . Today You strengthen us. 
Hayom t’varcheynu . . . Today You bless us. 
Hayom t’gadleynu . . . Today You magnify us. 
And so the musaf service draws to a close, repeating the Alenu. The 
community retreats home to rest and eat, so as to return late in the afternoon 
for Tashlich. 
TASHLICH 
The theme of water that appears in the Bible readings for the first 
morning of Rosh Hashanah is strengthened through action later in the day. 
For centuries, traditional Jews have gone that afternoon to the nearest body 
of free-flowing water—a river, lake, or ocean. (If the first day of Rosh 
Hashanah is a Shabbos, the ceremony is postponed till the next day.) There 
they have recited several Psalms and a line from the prophet Micah: “And 
You will cast all their sins into the depths of the sea.” And they have shaken 
out their pockets of lint and bread crumbs, symbolically shaking loose their 
sins of the past year so that they could be swept downstream—“into the 
depths of the sea.” Since the word for “You will cast” in Hebrew is tashlich, 
the ceremony has become known as Tashlich. 
Among some Jewish communities, there have been special versions of 
Tashlich. Kurdish Jews actually leaped into the water and swam like fish to 
cleanse themselves of sin. Chassidim in Galicia sent little floats of straw out 
upon the water, set them afire with candles, and rejoiced that their sins were 
either burned up or washed away. In Jerusalem, where even brooks are hard 
to find, Tashlich is done at a well. 
Tashlich began after the Talmudic period. Indeed, no direct mention of 
it has been found in any manuscript until a thousand years later. Scholars 
think it took root first among the Jews of Europe in about the thirteenth 
century, and spread among Sephardic and Oriental Jews in the sixteenth 
century through the influence of the Kabbalists who lived in the mystical 
town of Safed in Northern Palestine. 
It spread despite the opposition of the rabbis. They feared that Jews who 


20 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
took part would rely on the magical powers of emptying their pockets to 
achieve the clearing of their sins—instead of changing their conduct, turning 
their lives around, and returning to God's path. But amcha, the ordinary 
people of the Jewish community, insisted on continuing. 
The rabbis tried to instill ethical content in the ceremony. One of them 
connected it with the story of the Binding of Isaac through a legend that 
Satan tried to deter Abraham by appearing as a rushing river in his path—and 
so we celebrate Abraham’s determination by seeking out a river. Others 
suggested that the ceremony used water so that fish could be its witnesses— 
since the eyes of fish never close, symbolizing the unblinking eye of God 
reviewing our behavior. But despite these explanations, the rabbis preserved 
their distaste—so much so that many editions of the Machzor do not include a 
Tashlich service. 
Why have the people insisted on preserving Tashlich despite rabbinical 
disapproval? It may be simply that it felt like a pleasant outdoor break from 
the solemnity of Rosh Hashanah—especially on the afternoon of the first 
day, moving toward a second full day of prayer and penitence, inside the 
synagoguge. Children find Tashlich especially delightful, and parents may be 
relieved to offer them a refreshing respite to run and jump in the open air, to 
clamber on the rocks along a river, to empty out their pockets above the 
rushing stream. 
Or there may also be a reason that, despite the rabbis, is rooted in the 
most profound meanings of Rosh Hashanah. In the passage about Ishmael 
that we read on the morning of the first day, we see that Hagar, in thirst and 
despair, having used up the bottle of water that Abraham gave her, casts her 
son Ishmael beneath a bush so that she will not have to see him die: 
“Vatashlaych et-hayeled.”’ It is her act of tashlich that brings God to show her a 
well of water. 
Yet surely Hagar does not want to get rid of Ishmael. She wants him to 
live. It is her casting him that brings them both to the life-giving water, that 
transforms him from dying to living, transforms him from her burden to her 
fruitful offspring. Perhaps the passage is telling us that when we do Tashlich at 
the water's edge we are not trying to get rid of our misdeeds but to transform 
them. We are trying to seek out and renew the life-giving energy that is 
concealed within a sin, and turn it into an energy for good. We are trying to 
give that energy new life, so that it can give new life to us. 
Such a view of Tashlich is borne out by the fact that on the culminating 
day of the Ten Days of Turning—on Yom Kippur—we read both the passage 
of Tashlich from the prophet Micah—“You will cast all their sins into the depths of the sea”—and from the Book of Jonah, where this line appears as Jonah cries out to God from the belly of the great fish: “You cast me (vatashlichayni) into the depths, into the heart of the sea.” Here again God did not intend to get rid of Jonah, but to transform him. Here again the water gives life—transforms and renews. 


ROSH HASHANAH + ?] 
That the Ten Days are bracketed by these versions of Tashlich—in word 
and ceremony—may provide us with an approach to the refreshing well of 
water that Hagar and Abraham experienced. After the dry and thirsty 
summer, after the spiritual thirst of remembering on Tisha B’Av the destruc- 
tion of the Temple and the brokenness of the world, we drink on Rosh 
Hashanah from the Well of our salvation—and we renew ourselves, turning 
even the death-energy of our sins toward life. 
SECOND DAY 
After Tashlich we repeat the evening service, now for the second day of 
Rosh Hashanah—and then return to light the festival candles and to share 
again a pleasant meal. Over the centuries, many celebrants have wanted to 
say the Sheh-hechianu blessing once again on the second night, but have felt 
constrained—since that blessing is reserved for new experiences, and to greet 
the new year all over again does not seem quite new. So the custom arose of 
eating a fruit we have not had for months, or wearing new clothes we have 
saved for the second night. Then Sheh-hechianu becomes proper for their 
newness. The second day of Rosh Hashanah proceeds much like the firs-— 
with changes in some of the poems inserted in the liturgy and with Tashlich 
omitted. 
GREETINGS 
Most of the festivals have their own special greetings. As befits the 
festival in which we greet a new year, there is a special sense of wanting to 
greet our friends when Rosh Hashanah comes. Long ago those who wrote 
letters during Elul (or during the days between Rosh Hashanah and Yom 
Kippur) would be sure to add: “L’shanah tovah tikkateyvu v’tichatemu. May 
you be written and sealed for a good year.” More recently, greeting cards have 
been printed with that message or one similar, and still more recently some 
Jews have taken to drawing or painting their own colorful Rosh Hashanah 
greetings for their friends. 
In face to face meetings, many simply say in Yiddish: “Goot yuntoff, 
goot yohr! Have a good holiday, have a good year,” or in Hebrew, “Shanah 
tovah! Good year!” There is a delicate distinction to be preserved regarding 
whether one wishes that another be written or sealed for a good year. The 
Talmud says that on Rosh Hashanah itself those who are wholly good are at 
once written into the Book of Life, and those who are wholly bad are at once 
written off as dead. Only for those in-between is the decision delayed until 
Yom Kippur. So once Rosh Hashanah is past, to wish that one’s friends be 
written into the Book of Life is to express our doubts about their status. If we 
wish to avoid this, from the end of Rosh Hashanah until Yom Kippur we can 
wish our friends that the Holy One seal them for a good year—-that on Yom 


22 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Kippur God will affix the Royal Seal to their names where they have already 
been written, in the Book of Life. Thus, “L’shanah tovah tichatemu.” 
@> NEW APPROACHES €€e 
In some small and intimate chavurah congregations, there have been 
long and sometimes painful discussions of how—in a modern, intensely 
active, hurried society—it is possible to achieve the profound contact be- 
tween people that is necessary for tshuvah and slichah, turning or repentance 
and forgiveness, to occur. If people will not ask for forgiveness, is it possible 
to forgive them? Is it necessary to confront them first? 
Such questions led people in one chavurah, Fabrangen in Washington, 
DC, to develop and successfully use an experiential approach to the Slichot 
process. Fabrangeners then shared this approach with members of synagogues 
of more traditional kinds, and several synagogues used this Slichot exercise 
with great success. 
Members of the community sat in a circle with separate bowls of salty 
water and fresh, sweet water scattered around the circle. They sang “V’ taheyr 
libeynu l’avdecha b’emet. Purify our hearts to serve You in truth.” Using pens 
of water-soluble ink, each of them wrote on a slip of paper the words, 
thoughts, actions that were their worst misdeeds of the previous year. They 
took time to think this through, each addressing his or her own misdeeds. 
Whenever they were ready, each one said or chanted, “V’tashlich 
bimtzulot yam chol chatotam. You shall cast all their sins into the depths of 
the sea,” and plunged the papers into the bowls of water. They sat, watching 
the words dissolve. 
After they had fully experienced the dissolution of their misdeeds, they 
turned to the bowls of fresh water. As a way of showing that each one 
accepted that all the others had confronted themselves and taken responsibil- 
ity to change their lives, each person used a cup to pour water from this bowl 
over the hands of the next person in the circle. Then each one lovingly dried 
that person’s hands. Together all sang “Oseh shalom bimromav hu ya-aseh 
shalom aleynu v’al kol Yisrael. May the One Who makes ultimate harmony 
in the universe make harmony among us and among all Israel.” And thus the community felt that it had taken a long step toward both repentance and 
forgiveness. 
@>> FOODS 
Since atleast as long ago as the Jews ate matzah in their headlong 
exodus from Egypt—which predated even the command of kosher food—the Jewish people have believed that how we eat has much to do with what we become. Not only at Passover but at every festival, Jews have assigned special 


ROSH HASHANAH + 23 
-foads as part of the celebration. (For all except Passover and the fast days, 
these special foods are customary rather than part of the required path of holy 
life. ) 
For Rosh Hashanah, the main qualities of the special foods are sweetness 
(for a sweet year); roundness (for the cycle of the year); and abundance (for 
fruitfulness and prosperity). Among some major special foods and recipes for 
Rosh Hashanah are these: *° 
TELGLACH 
(Honey Confections) 
SYRUP: 
1% cup honey 
1 cup sugar 
2 teaspoons ginger 
DOUGH: 
3 eggs Y) teaspoon lemon rind 
Y teaspoon baking powder 4 teaspoon ginger 
2 cups flour 1 teaspoon vanilla 
2 teaspoons sugar Y cup raisins (chopped) 
2 tablespoons oil Y) cup finely cut nuts 
FOR DOUGH: Mix flour, baking powder, sugar, ginger. Beat eggs, add oil and 
tind, then flour mixture to make soft dough that can be handled. Divide 
dough in two parts. Roll each part into a long narrow strip ¥% inch thick and 5 
inches wide. Spread with raisins and nuts, press into dough lightly with 
rolling pin. Roll up strip, pinch open edge firmly closed. Flour knife and slice 
into 2 inch pieces. If preferred the filling may be mixed into the dough then 
hand rolled into strips about 1 inch thick and cut into pieces. 
COOKING: Bring honey and sugar to boil in deep kettle. Turn flame low but 
keep boiling slowly. Carefully drop dough, one at a time, into boiling honey. 
When all are in, cover and cook on low flame. DO NOT UNCOVER for 2 
hour or the dough will not rise. Then raise cover only high enough to peek 
in. When top layer of teiglach has become golden brown, tum the mixture 
very carefully with a wooden spoon, bringing the bottom ones up. Cook until 
all are golden brown and sound hollow when stirred with spoon. Test by 
breaking one open—should be crisp and dry inside. Sprinkle 2 teaspoons 
ginger into mixture and stir carefully. Tur off light, add 2 tablespoons 
boiling water and stir again. Quickly remove teiglach from honey with slotted 
spoon and spread on board or platter which has been rinsed with cold water. 
Keep pieces separated. Roll in coconut or sugar and finely cut nut mixture. 
Keeps very well. 
*These recipes, like most of the others in the book, have been used by Hannah 
Waskow and Rose Gertz. 


24 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
MOCK CHOPPED HERRING 
1 lb. can herring 8-10 slices white bread 
3 medium onions 2 peeled apples (tart) 
8 hard boiled eggs 2 tablespoons oil 
salt, pepper, sugar dash of garlic powder 
vinegar 
This makes enough for a buffet serving, but may be halved for 4 to 5 portions. 
Skin, gut, remove dark meat from herring. Trim crusts from bread and 
soak bread in vinegar. Grind fish, bread, onions, apples and 6 of the eggs. 
(Use the 2 extra eggs as decoration either by slicing or separating the yolks 
and whites and forcing through a sieve or ricer and sprinkling over herring 
before serving. They may be used in the herring and radishes and parsley used 
for decoration.) Season to taste with salt, pepper, garlic powder, and sugar. 
Add oil and additional vinegar as needed for taste and consistency. Let stand 
overnight and check for taste and texture. Keeps well. 
FRUIT CAKE 
1 cup sugar 1 teaspoon cinnamon 
Y, cup shortening Y teaspoon cloves 
1 egg Yy teaspoon nutmeg 
2 cups flour dash of ginger 
1 teaspoon baking soda dash of allspice 
1 cup tomato juice lemon rind 
1 teaspoon juice 1 cup raisins 
1 teaspoon vanilla Y cup nuts 
% cup of mixture of dates, candied 
fruit, & coconut 
Cream shortening and sugar. Add egg. Sift flour, soda, spices and add 
alternately with tomato juice. Add lemon rind and vanilla. Fold in raisins, 
nuts, and fruit mixture. Pour into prepared pan. Grease pan, line with waxed 
paper, and grease again. Use 9 or 10 inch tube. Bake at 350° for 10 minutes 
and then at 325° for about 45-50 minutes. Check with cake tester or straw. 
Tester should be clean. Cool in pan on rack for 20 minutes before removing. 
Bourbon or other liquor may be poured over the cake when cold. (About 2 or 
3 ounces.) Keeps well. 
KREPLACH 
1 egg, slightly beaten 2 tablespoons chicken fat (or vege- Y% teaspoon salt table fat) 
1 cup sifted flour (about) 1 egg 
1 cup cooked beef, chopped Y2 teaspoon salt 
2 tablespoons onion, minced 


ROSH HASHANAH - 25 
Make a noodle dough of the egg, salt, and flour, mixing together in the order 
named, to make a stiff dough that can be handled with fair ease. Knead on a 
lightly floured board until smooth and elastic. Roll out to paper thinness; cut 
into 2 to 3 inch squares. 
Mix together the remaining ingredients and use as filling. Place a 
spoonful of filling on half of each square of dough, folding remaining half 
over top, point to point, to make triangles. Press edges together and secure 
with a fork dipped in flour. Drop into boiling, salted water, cover tightly, and 
cook for 20 minutes. Serve in the soup. They may be fried or baked and 
served as a side dish with meat. Makes about 2 dozen. 
HONEY CAKE 
Y cup fat Yr cup nuts 
1 cup sugar 3 teaspoons baking powder 
1 cup honey (may be mixed with 1 teaspoon baking soda 
white syrup) 2 teaspoons cinnamon 
3 eggs 2 teaspoons ginger 
1 cup warm black strong coffee Y, teaspoon each nutmeg, cloves, 
Y, cup raisins allspice 
3 cups flour 
Cream fat and sugar. Add honey and eggs. Sift all dry ingredients and add 
alternately with coffee. Fold in raisins and nuts. Pour into greased 10 inch 
tube pan or several bread pans. Bake at 325-350° 50-60 minutes. 
@>> GO AND STUDY «eee 
Shmuel Yosef Agnon, Days of Awe (Schocken Books), is a classic and 
wonderful collection of brief stories, Biblical excerpts, descriptions of com- 
munal practices, etc., in regard to the whole period of repentance and return. 
See also Max Arzt, Justice and Mercy (Holt, Rinehart & Winston), for a 
commentary on the Rosh Hoshanah liturgy; Philip Goodman, The Rosh 
Hashanah Anthology (Jewish Publication Society of America); and Irving 
Greenberg, Guide to High Holy Days (National Jewish Resource Center, 
NYC). 
There is a wide variety of Machzors, of which the one edited by Jules 
Harlow for the (Conservative) Rabbinical Assembly has been most useful to 
me. It does not include a Tashlich service; that can be found in Philip 
Birnbaum’s Daily Prayer Book (Ha-Siddur Ha-Shalem) (Hebrew Publishing 
Company). Selihot is a booklet published by the Rabbinical Assembly for use 
in Slichot services. For an excellent description of how to make and sound 
your own shofar, see The First Jewish Catalog (Jewish Publication Society). 


YONAH 
From Yonah, read on Yom Kippur, ‘And Yonah prayed to the Lord his God out of the fish’s belly...” (Yonah 2:2-2:8') Yonah the prophet and the dove (yonah) from Noah’s Ark were both endangered by water, sent on two missions, failed the first, and eventually wound up on the dry land (yabasha). 


fe> CHAPTER TWO «eg 
FACE TO FACE— 
YOM KIPPUR 
The moon of Tishri swells into an oval. If the barely visible new moon 
at Rosh Hashanah is the moment of birth, then the oval moon is the moment 
of developed identity. It is when we are grown up enough to face God. 
In the moon cycle of the seventh month, the month of Tishri, Rosh 
Hashanah has the place analogous to that of Pesach in the solar cycle—the 
place of spring, of birthing, of newness. In the lunar cycle of Tishri, Yom 
Kippur has the place analogous to that of Shavuot in the solar cycle. At 
Shavuot, God and the Jewish people stand face to face at Sinai. We receive 
the Torah, and we enter the Covenant. At Yom Kippur, God and the Jewish 
people stand face to face at an inward, not an outward mountain. It is the 
mountain of our misdeeds and our sorrows. 
So Yom Kippur has become the moment when most Jews individually 
and the Jewish people collectively experience the strongest sense of part- 
nership and covenant with God—the strongest sense that if the people have 
striven with all their energy to redress the wrongs they have done, God will 
forgive them and give them a sense of harmony and wholeness. In this way, 
Yom Kippur fills in emotional fact the place it represents in the time 
sequence of the lunar cycle as an analogue to Shavuot, the moment of the 
Covenant at Sinai. 
This moment of most intense spiritual experience is the moment of 
atonement—the moment when all misdeeds are covered over. Yom Kippur 
becomes a kind of tallis in time—a prayer shawl to cover the confusions of the 
year. As worshippers walk into shul and pick up the tallis, they cover their 
ge. 


28 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
heads for a moment so as to wipe away the pointless, pathless wanderings of 
the world. Under the tallis, with the world invisible, it is possible for a 
moment to look toward God. So we could look at Yom Kippur as the prayer 
shawl that God spreads over all the people Israel, if we will take the trouble to 
pick the tallis up. Under this tallis we can stand face to face with God. 
>> ORIGINS €€ 
In the Torah, the Five Books of Moses, there are four different recount- 
ings of the festivals. Two of these address the cycle of the solar year alone, 
and ignore the Tishri lunar cycle of the seventh month. In these two, Rosh 
Hashanah and Yom Kippur do not even appear. But the Books of Leviticus 
and Numbers describe both the solar and the lunar cycles, and it is in 
Leviticus that Yom Kippur takes on its special significance: 
Mark, the tenth day of this seventh month is the day of atonement. It 
shall be a sacred occasion for you: you shall practice self-denial [or: you 
shall afflict your souls; or: you shall press down your egos], and you shall 
bring an offering by fire to the Lord; you shall do no work throughout 
that day. For it is a day of atonement, on which atonement is made on 
your behalf before Adonai your God. Indeed, any person that will not 
be pressed down throughout that day shall be cut off from his people. 
And any person who does any work throughout that day, that person I 
will destroy from amidst his people. . . . A Sabbath of complete rest 
[or, a fully shabbosdik Shabbos] shall it be for you, and you shall press 
down your egos (Lev. 23:26-32). 
It is also Leviticus (Chapter 16) that specifies the tenth of Tishri as the 
date on which the high priest shall conduct a special ceremony to purge 
defilement from the Shrine and from the people. The heart of the ritual is 
that the high priest shall bring a bull and two goats as a special offering. 
* First, the bull is sacrificed so as to purge the Shrine from any defile- 
ments, what might now be called uncanny vibrations, caused by misdeeds of 
the priest himself and of his household. 
* Secondly, one of the goats is chosen by lot to be sacrificed so as to 
purge the Shrine of any similar defilement stimulated by misdeeds of the 
whole Israelite people. 
* Finally, the second goat is sent away—not sacrificed—so as to cleanse 
the people themselves. The goat is marked “for Azazel” and sent away to wander in the wilderness. (This word is not fully understood; Azazel may have meant an inaccessible place of rocks and cliffs, or a demonic power that dwelt in the wilderness; or it may simply have meant an escape goat—what 


YOM KIPPUR +» 29 
came into English as scapegoat.) Before this goat is sent out, the high priest 
lays both his hands upon its head and “confesses over it all the iniquities and 
transgressions of the Israelites, whatever their misdeeds, putting them on the 
head of the goat.” Thus, the Torah adds, “the goat shall carry on it all their 
iniquities to an inaccessible region.” 
By the time of the Second Temple, this ritual had been somewhat 
elaborated, and one crucial element had been added to it. That element was 
that on three separate occasions, in a grand crescendo, the high priest 
appeared before the people, and three times he recited a formula of confes- 
sion in their hearing. The first confession was on the account of his own sins 
and those of his household; the second, on the account of the priestly tribe of 
Levi; the third, on the account of the whole people. 
On this occasion only, in the entire year, the confession included the 
priest’s saying aloud the Name of God embodied in the letters YHVH. This 
was the Name that God gave and explained to Moses at the burning bush, 
the Name that was a kind of distillation of “I Am Becoming Who I Am 
Becoming,” the Name that was not a name in the sense of a label by which 
God could be called and controlled, and therefore the Name which could not 
be said aloud. It was, therefore, all year long euphemized by saying, whenever 
YHVH appeared in a text or invocation, Adonai, The Lord. Only on Yom 
Kippur was the Name said, aloud, in all its original awesomeness. (How the 
Name was pronounced on this occasion was so thoroughly protected from 
record-keeping that might profane it that we no longer know how it was 
done.) 
In each confession, when the high priest reached the recitation of the 
Name, the whole people would prostrate themselves and say aloud, “Baruch 
shem K’vod malchuto l’olam va-ed. Blessed be the Name of the radiance of 
His Kingship, forever and beyond.” On the third recitation, the one for their 
own sins, they knew that the high priest had just before—on this one 
occasion in all the year—entered the Holy of Holies, the inmost room of the 
Temple where God’s Presence was most fully felt. He had entered it three 
times, and only then come out to confess on behalf of all the people and put 
their sins upon the head of the goat for Azazel. 
The result of this triple entry into the Holy of Holies, this triple 
recitation of God’s most holy Name, and this triple prostration by the entire 
people, was an utterly awesome sense of God’s Presence making atonement 
for the people, cleansing them of all their sins, permitting them to begin the 
year afresh, renewing their lives. So total was this sense of transformation 
that after it, the mood of the people shifted from solemn awe to joyful 
celebration. The young, unmarried men and women went to dance in the 
fields and to choose spouses for themselves. Yom Kippur and the fifteenth of 
Av were the only days in the year when this kind of mass public espousal 
would take place. 


30 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Theodore Gaster, a historian of Jewish ceremonies and rituals, points 
out that a public purgation of the accumulated communal sinfulness is to be 
found in many cultures. In ancient Babylonia, the rite of kuppuru, purgation, 
came in the midst of the ten-day coronation festival. It involved the sacrifice 
of a ram in order to eliminate impurity in the holy places, and the public 
confession of sins by the King. A human scapegoat—a condemned crimi- 
nal—was then beaten in the public streets. 
We can only, each of us, draw on our own sensibilities to understand the 
differences between this ritual and that of the Israelites. The key difference is 
that where the Babylonians used a ram and a human being, the Torah uses 
two goats—one to purify the shrine, the other to purify the people. To me it 
seems that this makes a big difference. The Babylonians seem to be saying 
that the impurities of the two realms are quite different. Those of the 
sacrificial realm can only be focused by a sacrificial beast; those of the people, 
by a person. In the Israelite ceremony, the very similarity of the goats 
underlines the close relationship between God’s world of holy ceremony and 
God’s world of holy human interaction. The Shrine, God’s house, is defiled 
not by sacrificial errors that are different from those errors that disfigure God’s 
people—but by the very same misdeeds that the people must expel from their 
own midst. Moreover, the fact that the scapegoat is, indeed, a goat—not a 
human being, even a criminal—underlines the possibility of tshuvah, repen- 
tant return, for all human beings. No human is to be expelled from the 
community. 
The ritual of the goats echoes the stories that we read ten days before, on 
Rosh Hashanah, of the ordeals of Ishmael (sent into the desert) and Isaac 
(bound for sacrifice). Thus the Yom Kippur ritual gives further emphasis that 
human beings are precious: offer up goats, not people! Perhaps there is even a 
hint that God might by Yom Kippur want, as it were, to do tshuvah for His 
threat, which we recall on Rosh Hashanah, to the lives of Ishmael and Isaac. 
Indeed, rabbinic tradition claimed it was on Yom Kippur that God’s com- 
mand to bind Isaac was fulfilled and God’s order to release Isaac came. So the 
patterns of God’s own tshuvah may have been evoked in this ten-day period as 
a lesson to che people: “If even God can tur from a stern decree to 
loving-kindness, then so can you . . . and if you do, you can expect forgive- 
ness.” 
The fact that the goats are chosen by lot reminds us, says Rav Joseph 
Soloveitchik, that chance and fate, though they do not rule the universe, 
play a part in it. Since we cannot really establish utter control over our own lives, we owe forgiveness to each other, and God to us, for our failings. 
If these are reasonable ways to sense the impact on the people of the Yom Kippur ritual while the Temple stood, then the evolution of Yom Kippur since the destruction of the Temple strengthens this basic approach. How people act toward each other is not simply important, but vital to the 


YOM KIPPUR + 3] 
God Who extends universal forgiveness—on condition of a universal com- 
mitment to turn human behavior around. 
Once the Temple, and with it the sacrificial system, had been shattered, 
the rabbis concluded that Yom Kippur itself—the very fact of the day’s arrival 
in the cycle of the calendar—brought about God’s forgiveness ... on 
condition: 
If someone said, “I will sin and repent, and sin again and repent,” he 
will be given no chance to repent. If he said, “I will sin and Yom 
Kippur will effect atonement,” then the Day of Atonement effects no 
atonement. For transgressions between human beings and God, Yom 
Kippur effects atonement; but for transgressions between a person and 
his fellow, Yom Kippur effects atonement only if he has made peace 
with his fellow. 
With the Temple and the scapegoat gone, what remained from the 
Torah’s commands as a form of life-practice and ritual that could focus 
consciousness on the day? There remained only two factors: the command to 
the people that they press down the self, or soul, or personality; and prayer. 
As to self-denial or self-abnegation, the rabbis concluded that it must be 
carried out in five ways: fasting from food, from drinking water, from washing _ 
or anointing the body, from wearing leather shoes, and from sexual inter- 
course. How did these practices accord with the sense that Yom Kippur was a 
day of transcendent joy, the day of restoration of harmony with God? Some 
commentators on the Fast—writing much later-—explain how these obser- 
vances may be joyful rather than ascetic: 
And they fast on this day to approach a resemblance to the angels, in as 
much as the fast is consummated by humbling themselves, lowering 
their heads, standing, bending their knees, and singing hymns of 
praise. Then all the physical powers abandon their natural functions 
and engage in spiritual functions, as though having no animal nature 
(Yehuda Halevi). 
If it was in my power, | would do away with all the afflictions—except 
for the afflictions on the bitter day of the destruction of our Temple, 
Tisha B’Av, for who could bear to eat on that day!—and the afflictions 
on the holy and awesome day, Yom Kippur, for who needs to eat on that 
day? (Abraham Joshua Heschel, The Apter Rebbe, as quoted in 
Agnon’s Days of Awe). 
Closely entwined with self-abnegation was the second remaining ele- 
ment of Yom Kippur, prayer. The mouths not used for food were used for 


32 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
chanting praise to God. So powerful was the sense of a full day of prayer that 
Philo of Alexandria explained Yom Kippur as one long blessing before one 
enormous meal. Yom Kippur, he pointed out, came just before the harvest 
. . . the meal that lasted all the year. So, just as Jews paused before a meal to 
say the motzi over bread, they paused before the harvest to thank and praise 
the God Who gave the harvest. But for the meal that would last all year, the 
blessing must last all day. So the Jews would pause from eating for one full 
day, and use the time to pray. 
@>> MAKING READY €€€® 
Out of these overlapping senses of Yom Kippur as a time of solemnity 
and joy, purification and atonement, pressing down of the self and giving 
away of the self, came a pattern of observance that lasted with little change 
into our own day. To begin with, the tradition built a conscious bridge from 
Rosh Hashanah to Yom Kippur. 
The ten days from Rosh Hashanah through Yom Kippur are known as 
the Days of Awe or the Days of tshuvah (repentance, turn-about). The 
traditional metaphor was that during this time God might rewrite a name, 
taking it from the ledger of death into the Book of Life, depending on how we 
act—whether we return to the path of decency, or not. So the seven days 
that lie between the two holy days are turned into a spiritual bridge from one 
to the other by several special practices in ceremony as well as in daily life. 
One is that in the standing silent prayer, the amidah, on each of these 
days there are inserted several passages: 
Remember us for life, King Who delights in life, and inscribe us in the 
Book of Life for Your own sake, Living God. 
Who is like You, compassionate (or Motherly) Father, compassionately 
remembering Your creatures toward life? 
Inscribe all the children of Your covenant for a good life. 
In the Book of Life, Blessing, Peace, and an honorable sustenance may 
be remembered and written before your very eyes—we and the whole of 
your people, the house of Israel—for a good life and for peace. Blessed 
are You, Who makes peace. 
And two blessings in the amidah are changed during the Ten Days: 
“Blessed be You, Adonai, the Holy God” becomes“. . . the Holy King,” and 
“Blessed be You, Adonai, King Who loves righteousness and judgment” 
becomes “Blessed be You, Adonai, the King of judgment.” 


YOM KIPPUR - 33 
During these days (except for Shabbos), the Slichot prayers for forgive- 
ness are recited early in the morning, and Avinu Malkenu is recited every 
morning and afternoon. 
Meanwhile, these days are an especially important time for acts of 
tzedakah (charitable righteousness), for study of the Prophets and the later 
books of the Bible, and for re-examination and correction of one’s own 
behavior. 
As a time of introspection and repair, it is unsuitable for starting new 
relationships, whether conflictful or harmonious—and so it is not a time for 
either lawsuits or weddings. But it is especially suitable for restoring old 
relationships—making apologies and offering forgiveness. 
The day immediately after Rosh Hashanah is a traditional day of limited 
fasting—Yom Tzom Gedaliah, the Day of the Fast of Gedaliah, commemo- 
rating the assassination of Gedaliah ben Achikam shortly after the Destruc- 
tion of the First Temple. Gedaliah was a member of a leading Jewish family, 
friend of the prophet Jeremiah, and supporter of Jeremiah’s policy of non- 
resistance to the Babylonian conquest. The Babylonians appointed Gedaliah 
provincial governor of Judah after they captured Jerusalem, and shortly 
afterward he was killed by a zealous patriot who evidently hoped to overthrow 
the Babylonian rule. The later prophet Zechariah mentions the observance of 
a fast day in his memory. It could be argued that the fast fits well into the 
Days of tshuvah, since the murder of Gedaliah out of patriotic motives in a 
sense represents, at the political level, the human proclivity for turning the 
desire for selfhood into the behavior of selfishness. The fast (from food and 
water only) lasts from dawn to sundown on the third day of Tishri. Reform 
Judaism does not view the Fast of Gedaliah as mandatory, and many Con- 
servative and modern Orthodox Jews do not observe it. Moving to the other 
pole, some traditional Jews observe a limited fast during all the Days of 
tshuvah except Shabbos and the day just before Yom Kippur. 
The Shabbos between Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur is known as 
Shabbos Shuvah, the Shabbos of Return. It is named after the prophetic 
portion that is read—made up of passages from Hosea (14:2-10), Micah 
(7:18-20), and Joel (2:15-27). The Hosea passage begins, “Return, O Israel, 
to Adonai your God; for you have stumbled in your iniquity.” The passage 
from Micah includes the line that is used in Tashlich, “You will cast all their 
sins into the depths of the sea,” and the passage from Joel begins, “Sound the 
shofar in Zion, hallow a fast, call an assembly.” So the readings for Shabbos 
Shuvah bring together the sense of human repair and Divine response that 
are intended to suffuse the whole of the Ten Days. Shabbos Shuvah was also 
one of only two in all the year (the other was Shabbos Hagadol, just before 
Pesach) when the leading rabbi of the city would give a sermon in its leading 
synagogue. His topic would be tshuvah, and usually he would urge and 
encourage, rather than attack or disparage. 
According to the reckoning that Yom Kippur was the day of the Binding 


34 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
of Isaac, the eighth of Tishri was the day on which Abraham rose early to 
take Isaac on his sacrificial journey. It is also the day on which Solomon’s 
dedication of the First Temple began. So the eighth of Tishri was tradition- 
ally given a special place among the Ten Days. The congregation rose even 
earlier than usual to pray, chanted a poem called “Thirteen Qualities” in 
praise of God’s thirteen attributes of loving-kindness (Exodus 34:6-7), and in 
parts of central Europe on that day the women would make candles by 
measuring a graveyard with string, then dipping the string into wax so as to 
become a wick. Meanwhile they would recite the names of the dead, invok- 
ing the merit of their piety in the seeking of God's forgiveness. 
On the day before Yom Kippur, the preparations reached an even higher 
pitch. In most traditional Jewish communities the ceremony of Kapparot was 
performed. For centuries some great rabbinical scholars opposed it, and in 
Reform and Conservative congregations almost everyone has abandoned it. 
Yet in many Orthodox shuls it continues, and in the chavurah communities, 
some have argued that we could learn from its physicality how to embody and 
act out our hope of forgiveness, and might try to work out a variant that feels 
fulfilling. 
The most usual custom was that at dawn of the day before Yom Kippur, 
each man took a rooster and each woman, a hen. Each held the fowl in the 
left hand, laid the right hand on its head, and swung it three times around 
one’s own head, three times saying, “This is my substitute, this is my 
exchange, this is my atonement. This fowl will go to death, and I will enter 
upon a good, long life and peace.” Then at once the fowl was slaughtered by 
the traditional ritual. Its liver, kidneys, and guts were put outside for the 
birds—to show compassion for all God’s creatures. In some places the rest of 
the meat was given to the poor; in others, the family kept the meat and gave 
the cost of the chicken in money to the poor. In some places long ago, 
Kapparot was done with food plants instead of animals. Children would take 
baskets early in Elul, fill them with dirt, and plant seeds of wheat, barley, 
peas, and beans in them. By the eve of Yom Kippur, the plants were a few 
inches tall—ready to be swung about the head with the same invocation and 
thrown into a stream. 
Some of the rabbis urged that giving tzedakah money to the poor be 
substituted for the whole Kapparot ceremony. One custom that fused these 
two approaches was that 18 coins would be held ina fist over the head of each 
child, whirled as Kapparot, and then given to the poor. (The number 18 was 
used because in the Jewish number system the letters of the alphabet are used 
to represent numbers—aleph as 1, beit as 2, etc. The letters for the word chai, 
life, add up to the number 18.) 
On the day before Yom Kippur, the rabbis said, eating and drinking well was of as deep importance as fasting was on Yom Kippur itself. For eating is a way of taking the physical and transforming it into the spiritual: using the 


YOM KIPPUR + 35 
body energy of food for the conscious service of God. Since on Yom Kippur 
we devote ourselves utterly to the spiritual, all the more important that we be 
conscious of where that energy comes from. Some bake loaves of challah in 
the shape of wings, since on Yom Kippur all Israel is like angels. Others 
decorate the challah with a ladder, echoing the prayer “Let our entreaties 
climb to You.” 
The afternoon before Yom Kippur was traditionally a time to visit the 
mikveh, the ritual bathhouse, for an immersion that would symbolize the 
oceanic experience of atonement and purification. Then the Separation 
Meal would be eaten, and in some communities after dinner the table would 
be covered with a fine tablecloth and books of Torah be spread upon it—to 
show that for Yom Kippur the words of prayer and study were replacing 
food. 
Finally, the family would remove their leather shoes and put on cloth 
ones instead—since leather was seen as a luxury, too fancy for this solemn 
day—and perhaps also to avoid using the skin of animals on a day of 
innocence, a day when we refrain from using their meat. The family would 
dress in white clothes to resemble angels, and would cover these clothes with 
a plain white kittel—a simple robe worn for one’s own wedding, at the 
Passover Seder, on Yom Kippur, and as a shroud for the dead. For ‘in these 
garments we shall go to the world above, to give a reckoning before the King 
of Kings. Therefore let us imagine that we are already standing in these 
garments before the Throne of Glory to give our reckoning. Let us wholly 
regret our sins, for in that hour one really does regret them. No regretting 
helps after death—but it does help now.” 
Then the family gathered round, and the parents blessed their 
children: 
May God make you as Ephraim and Menashe. May it be the will of our 
Father who is in heaven to place his love and fear in your heart. May 
the fear of God be before you all the days of your life, so that you will 
not sin; and may your delight be in the Torah and in the command- 
ments. May your eyes look straight ahead. May your mouth speak 
wisdom, and your heart contemplate fear. May your hands be engaged 
in keeping the commandments, and your legs run to do the will of your 
Father who is in heaven. May He give you sons and daughters who are 
righteous and engage in the study of the Torah and in keeping the 
commandments all their days. May your spring be blessed; and may 
God allow you to find your rightful sustenance in ease and with plenty, 
beneath His own broad hand, and not through the gifts of flesh and 
blood. May your livelihood be one which will set you free for the 
service of God; and may you be inscribed and sealed for a good and long 
life in the midst of all the righteous of Israel. Amen. 


36 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
And then the holy day candles were lit and the family left for shul. 
@>> YOM KIPPUR ITSELF «eee 
Traditionally, the actual doing of Yom Kippur (aside from the non- 
doing involved in the five forms of fasting) is participation in five separate 
services during the 25 hours of the day—separate in the sense that each 
includes the quiet standing prayer, the amidah. These five—the largest 
number of services on any day in the Jewish year—preserve an ancient Jewish 
tradition of five services on all days, a tradition that entered Moslem practice 
where five services a day became standard throughout the year. The five are 
Maariv, evening; Shacharit, morning; Musaf, additional; Minchah, afternoon; 
and only on Yom Kippur, late afternoon Neilah—the service of the closing of 
the gates of Heaven. In traditional practice, the four daytime services take 
the entire day, with little or no pause between them. 
KOL NIDRE NIGHT 
Before the regular evening service, chanted to the same melodies as 
the evening of Rosh Hoshanah, comes a unique ritual of Yom Kippur—the 
chanting of Kol Nidre. For this evening service, unlike any other in the 
whole year, the congregants wear the tallis. They put it on just before 
sundown, so that by natural light they can still see the tzitzit, fringes. One 
member of the congregation who will lead the chanting stands flanked by two 
others, the three representing a court of justice. They must also begin just 
before sundown, for the court is about to do a legal action—and a Jewish 
court cannot make decisions at night. Together they say: 
In a session of the Court on high and in a session of this court below, 
based on the consent of that Place Which is beyond all places and on 
the consent of the community that sits in this place, we declare it 
permitted to plead together with all who are transgressors. 
And then three times, the first in a whisper like someone who is 
overwhelmed at newly entering the palace of the King and the third time 
aloud like one who feels at home as a member of the king’s household, the 
three members of the court and the whole congregation recite: 
All vows and oaths, all promises and obligations, all renunciations and 
responses, that we shall make from this Yom Kippur till the next—may 
it come to us in peace—all of them we retract. May we be absolved of 
them all, may we be released from them all, may they all be null and 


YOM KIPPUR + 37 
void, may they all be of no effect. May these vows not be vows, may 
these oaths not be oaths, may these responses not be responses. 
Then all the people remind God of the promise of forgiveness: 
And the whole congregation of the children of Israel shall be forgiven 
as well as the sojourner who sojourns among them, for all the people 
acted in error (Numbers 15:26). 
The leader of the service repeats the words of Moses after the sin of the 
Golden Calf: 
Please forgive the sin of this people, out of your great loving-kindness. 
Forgive us as you have forgiven this people, from Egypt until here and 
now. 
And the congregation answers with God’s words: 
1 have forgiven—as you asked. (Num. 14:19-20.) 
There are several puzzling aspects of Kol Nidre. 
Why this permission to plead with God along with transgressors? It is 
said to have been instituted in the thirteenth century so that those who had 
violated communal regulations and come under the ban could return to the 
community on the Day of Atonement. But there is a broader sense in which 
all the worshippers are transgressors; they both recognize their failings and 
agree to pray with each other nevertheless—or indeed, all the more. 
Why this annulment of vows? And why does it look forward to the 
coming year, instead of annulling vows from the year just past? Some of 
the greatest of the rabbis objected to the whole business, warning that the 
seriousness of vows would be undermined. A century ago some Reform Jews 
tried to eliminate it—but after several decades took Kol Nidre back. In the 
earliest version of the text and among the Sephardic communities still, the 
annulment looks back to vows made between the last Yom Kippur and 
the present one—which may seem more rational. 
Some believe that the transgressors being mentioned were likely to keep 
sinning in the future, since they were loyal secret Jews who were posing as 
Christians or Muslims in fear for their lives, who had taken their lives in their 
hands to come to synagogue on Yom Kippur, but who would keep on posing. 
Thus the plea for their release from false vows of apostasy. 
Yet even today there is a teaching in the forward-looking annulment 
that may best be understood visually. Imagine standing in a great steamship, 
looking forward into unknown, turbulent waters. Ahead of the ship there is a 


38 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
cleavage of the sea; the waters are affected even before the ship can reach 
them. Yom Kippur acts like such a ship—casting its influence ahead, healing 
the spiritual disturbance that will arise from a troubled vow, even before it 
can be uttered. 
And why annul vows? To free us from the imprisonment of acting only 
out of a promise—rather than out of a free and serious choice of what is good. 
Is it good to honor our parents, be faithful to our friends, love and teach our 
children? Then let us do these things because they are acts of goodness, not 
because we have bound ourselves by a vow to do them. Kol Nidre cancels 
every guilt trip. 
With the special Kol Nidre passage completed, the congregation recites 
Sheh-hechianu, blessing the One Who keeps us alive to reach this moment, 
and then it enters into the evening service. 
The service introduces several special elements of Yom Kippur: the 
Ashamnu and Al Chet versions of a confession of misdeeds, and one of the 
most powerful poetic songs of the day—an imploring of God, “Ki anu 
amecha, v’atah eloheynu.” The two confessions are in the plural—‘‘We have 
sinned”—and the misdeeds are listed in alphabetical order. In this way the 
congregation takes collective responsibility for undoing all the misdeeds of its 
members, all the sins “from A to Z”—even those it does not think to 
mention. 
The song “Ki anu amecha” is sung: 
Ki anu amecha, v’atah eloheynu; 
Anu vanecha, v’atah avinu. 
Anu avadecha, v’atah adoneynu; 
Anu k’halecha, v’atah chelkeynu. 
Anu nachalatecha v’atah goraleynu; 
Anu tzonecha v’atah ro-eynu. 
Anu charmecha v’atah notreynu; 
Anu f’oolatecha v’atah yotzreynu. 
Anu rah-yah-techa v’atah dodeynu; 
Anu s’gulatecha v’atah kroveynu. 
Anu amecha v’atah malkenu; 
Anu mamirechah v’atah mamireynu. 
Its successive verses go through a series of complementary pairs, “We are 
Your people, You are our God; we are Your children, You are our Parent; we 
are Your flock, You are our Shepherd .. .” and end with a triumphant 
equality, “We are Your bespoken, and You are our Bespoken.” In a sense, 
this song is a miniature of the whole process of Yom Kippur: first it plunges 
the Jewish people into humble submission, a cleansing affirmation of their 
dependence on God—and then, as a paradoxical result of this very submis- 
sion, lifts them up to be able to see God face to face. For a moment, the 


YOM KIPPUR - 39 
people become as glorious in possibility and as clear in purpose as God’s own 
Self. 
There is a tradition that the Yom Kippur evening service never ends— 
that there is a continuing bond through the night from that service to the 
morning one. Some Jews sleep overnight in the synagogue, or stand watch 
through the night. In some chavurah congregations, this continuity has been 
expressed by ending the evening service with an open-ended meditation. 
Drawing on a prayer of the Chassidic rebbe Levi Yitzchak of Berditschev, 
they say, individually: 
Lord of the World, I stand before You and before my neighbors— 
pardoning, forgiving, struggling to be open to all who have hurt and 
angered me. Be this hurt of body or soul, of honor or property, whether 
they were forced to hurt me or did so willingly, whether by accident or 
intent, whether by word or deed—I forgive them because we are 
human. May no one feel guilty on my account. | am ready to take upon 
myself the commandment, ‘Love your neighbor as yourself.’ 
and remain in the prayer room, meditating, until each feels satisfied, having 
fully forgiven those who have harmed him/her. One by one the congregants 
quietly leave as they reach this point. Since the congregation as a whole 
never formally closes the service, the atmosphere of prayer and reconciliation 
continues, hovering in mid-air even after the last member leaves. 
THE MORNING SERVICE 
In the morning, the service is much like that for Rosh Hashanah. One 
moment is unique: after the Sh’ma (Hear O Israel, the Lord our God—the 
Lord is One), on this day alone in all the year the traditional response, 
“Baruch shem k’vod malchuto l’olam va-ed. Blessed is the name of the 
radiance of His Kingship, for ever and beyond” is said aloud—instead of 
murmured. The distinction was based on the tradition that the response was 
forbidden by a ruling empire, which thought it was subversive of the Jews to 
be celebrating any other King than the Emperor—even an invisible King in 
Heaven. So the Jews acquiesced in murmuring it all year. But defiantly, on 
Yom Kippur—on the day that when the Temple stood, the people had 
shouted out “Baruch shem k’vod” as the high priest called out the Holy 
Name—on that one day, they insisted on saying it aloud. (Reform syna- 
gogues now say the response aloud all year, on the ground that in a free 
society there is no reason to keep acting like victims. Others continue as they 
were—for the sake of tradition, or for the sake of remembering oppression 
even when not experiencing it, or for the sake of enhancing the triumphant 
shout on Yom Kippur. ) 
On Yom Kippur, unlike most holidays, there are two full Torah services, 


40 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
with two different readings and two different Prophetic passages. In the 
morning, the Torah passage is Leviticus 16, the description of the high 
priest’s special sacrifice on Yom Kippur. It is followed by a reading from Isaiah 
(57:14-58:16) that forces everyone to confront the full meaning of Yom 
Kippur. The inner experience of Yom Kippur, says Isaiah, is the empty belly 
of the one who fasts; but this is not the real inner meaning. It is the outer 
experience—making sure that the hungry have food to eat, that the naked 
have clothes to wear—it is this outward help to others that God demands and 
recognizes as the deed that brings atonement. 
Thus the rabbis placed this powerful lesson just at the point in mid- 
morning when the fast is beginning to bite at the innards of the congregation. 
Just at that moment, when all might be feeling sorry for themselves or 
triumphant in their sacrifice, God_and the prophet challenge them to a 
deeper feeling. The Torah reading affirms the cleansing importance of a 
powerful ritual; the Prophetic reading insists that it be acted out in social 
justice. 
Among Ashkenazic Jews, the morning service includes yizkor, the 
memorial prayer for the dead. In some congregations, those who have no 
close relatives to mourn leave the prayer room during yizkor. In others, all 
remain, in recognition and memorial of those in the wider mishpacha or 
family who have died, especially those martyrs who died for kiddush hashem— 
in affirming the holiness of God’s Name against oppressive mobs or 
tulers. 
MUSAF 
The musaf or additional service on Yom Kippur serves to re-enact the 
special Avodah or service brought by the high priest at noon this day when 
the Temple stood. The heart of the musaf is a reading of the Talmudic 
passage describing in detail exactly what the priest and the people did, rising 
in pitch three times to the tempo of the three prostrations of the entire 
people. In many congregations, the entire body of congregants prostrates 
itself on the floor at those three moments in the recitation, calling out as our 
forebears did, “Baruch shem kavod malchuto |’olam va-ed.” To a modern 
eye, this prostration looks like a little death. Perhaps we accept the posture of 
death in order to embody—literally to act out in our bodies—our acceptance 
of the death of pride and self as well as selfishness. When the Temple stood, 
it was the moment of most intense encounter with God; for many Jews today, 
it still is. 
When we rise from the Avodah, it is at once to hear of the deaths of the 
ten great rabbis whom the Emperor Hadrian condemned for teaching Torah. 
It is as if this minyan—representing our whole people—fell in death so that 
Torah might rise, teaching us that our small death in the Avodah is to bear 
witness to our individual and collective will to renew a holy life. 


YOM KIPPUR + 4] 
In many congregations, this martyrology section of the musaf service has 
been reworked to include the martyrdom of the Six Million who died in the 
Holocaust and of other, smaller martyrdoms of many kinds. In the Fab- 
rangen, an independent chavurah in Washington, DC, it has on occasion 
included a reading of parts of Kaddish, Allen Ginsberg’s agonized memory of 
the madness and death of his mother; a memory of the Jewish women who 
died in the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire; a memory of Schwerner, Chaney, 
and Goodman, who were murdered in 1964 in Mississippi—Black and Jew 
together—for their devotion to racial justice; a memory of Orlando Letelier 
and Ronni Karpen Moffit, South American Christian and North American 
Jew, who were murdered nearby in Washington for seeking to build a free 
society in Chile. 
In the Fabrangen it has also included, year after year since 1973, a stark 
memory of the moment during Yom Kippur that year when word reached the 
congregation of the outbreak of renewed war between Israel and her neigh- 
bors. When that word came in 1973, the congregation stood, paralyzed and 
silent, until it was able to sing, to a melody composed by one of its members 
for a peace vigil years before: 
Eytz cha-im hi, I’machizikim bah; eytz chaim hi, |’machizikim bah; eytz 
cha-im hi, I’shalom. Eytz cha-im hi, I’shalom. 
“She (the Torah) is a Tree of Life, for those who hold her close. A Tree 
of Life—for peace.” And each year since, the congregation has done the 
same, yearning for and affirming the peace ordained by the Torah. 
MINCHAH 
The afternoon service focuses around the reading of another Torah 
portion and of the Book of Jonah as the Prophetic passage. The usual Torah 
portion is Leviticus 18, the chapter that catalogs forbidden kinds of sexual 
relationships. Some scholars believe that this passage was chosen to check 
any tendency to license and abandon that might have followed and sprung 
from the spiritual intensity and release of Yom Kippur. In Temple days, that 
afternoon was the moment of dancing and betrothals. So the passage might 
have been intended either to prevent this celebration from descending into 
an orgy, or to remind the men and women of what marriages were forbidden 
by the Torah. There is a minority suggestion in the Talmud that Leviticus 19, 
the holiness code of decent behavior and social justice, be read instead; and 
some congregations do so now. A widely used Conservative Machzor, edited 
by Jules Harlow, includes it. 
The reading of the Book of Jonah—and in some congregations, an open 
discussion of its meaning—is one of the richest experiences of Yom Kippur. 
The book can be read on many levels. It is an allegory of the individual soul, 


42 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
struggling between hunger for death and oblivion, and the readiness for 
rebirth and new responsibility. It is a teaching about the obligations of the 
people Israel in regard to all the nations. It is a theme and variations on 
tshuvah—repentance—in the prophet, the city Nineveh, and God’s own 
Self. It is a meditation on one of the themes of Tishri, water as death and as 
life. Immediately after Jonah, the brief Tashlich passage from Micah is read, 
underlining the moment when Jonah himself cries out to God, “You have 
cast me into the depths, into the heart of the sea.” And thus as the daylight 
of Yom Kippur dims in later afternoon, there is an echo of the Rosh 
Hashanah afternoon ten days before, when the congregation did Tashlich, 
casting, at the stream. 
NEILAH 
Finally, there comes the fifth service: the closing of the gates. The gates 
of the Temple; the gates of Heaven; the gates of the human heart and human 
possibility—all are said to be about to shut. “Open the gate for us at the time 
the gate is closing. The day is done, the sun is setting, soon to be gone. Let us 
enter Your gates.” 
Some congregations keep the Ark open and stand for all of Neilah. 
Although the Ashamnu confession of sins is recited for the fifth time, the Al 
Chet is not—and instead the prayers shift toward a consciousness of God’s 
forgiveness. The prayer “Write us in the Book of Life” is replaced by “Seal us 
in the Book of Life.” One last time the congregation sings Avinu Malkenu, 
and then proclaims God to itself and to the world: 
Sh’ma Israel Adonai Eloheynu adonai echad! 
Baruch shem k’vod malchuto I’olam va-ed! (Three times.) 
Adonai hu ha-elohim! (Seven times. ) 
The Lord—that is who God is! joyously affirming that “The Liberator—that 
is the Creator!” or perhaps, “The still small Voice within is also the Ultimate 
and Infinite!” 
This last outcry comes from the mouths of the Israelites at Mount 
Carmel, when the prophet Elijah called them to choose beween don ad 
Baal as the fructifier of the earth—between the faith that the God~Who 
liberated them from slavery, gave them the Torah, and spoke as an intimate, 
was also the wellspring of nature—and on the other hand the belief that the God of history and human contact had no connection with a god who sent 
the rain and shaped the fertile earth. 
It is no accident that affirming the Unity behind nature and history is 
natural acts of life, and history has stopped from its normal ups and downs, so 
that the spirit can be utterly reborn. 


YOM KIPPUR - 43 
These outcries by the people are sealed by the eerie voice of the shofar, 
in the long blast that ends Yom Kippur. The congregation calls out, “L’shana 
ha-ba-ah b’Yirushalayim! Next year in Jerusalem!” 
AFTERMATH 
In many congregations the evening service is said at once. Then, still in 
shul together or going home in clusters of family and friends, people make 
havdala e ceremony that separates a holy time from an ordinary time. 
Tih does not include the first paragraph, “Hiney eyl y’shuati,” 
from thé tavdalah after Shabbos. It does include the blessings over wine and 
fire. For the fire, many traditional households use a long-burning candle lit 
before Yom Kippur to light a new candle.) Then people break their fast. 
Looking forward four days to the celebration of Sukkot, the harvest 
Festival of Huts, some Jews nail one board to another as a symbolic head start 
in building the sukkah. One way to see this symbolic act is that it carries out 
the tradition that the completion of one commanded act helps us move 
directly to the doing of another. Another way to see this first nailing in the 
sukkah is that it embodies the shift from the inward rebuilding that goes on 
during Yom Kippur to the outward rebuilding of the world that we are now 
obligated to begin. 
Finally, many communities use the night after Yom Kippur as the time 
to bless the swelling moon of Tishri. The ceremony of Kiddush Levana— 
hallowing the pale-white moon—is done each month on a night between the 
crescent and the not-quite-full moon. Its joyful shouts of “Shalom aleichem! 
Aleichem shalom!” and its dancing gestures toward the moon make a fitting 
connection with the joyful celebration of the full moon at Sukkot. 
@>> NEW APPROACHES €€€® 
According to Philo of Alexandria, a learned Jew who was strongly 
influenced by Hellenistic philosophy, the fast of Yom Kippur comes when it 
does because it is like a pause to say a blessing over a meal. The meal is the 
harvest—the meal of the entire year—so the pause is long. 
On the basis of this thought, the Fabrangen—a chavurah-style congrega- 
tion in Washington, DC—has used these poems/blessings as part of its Yom 
Kippur service. 
Blessed are You, O Lord, 
Who gives us this day of atonement; 
Who asks us to pause from our mouthing of food 
In order to speak of You and only You; 
Who asks us to pause from our drinking of water 


44 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
In order to fill ourselves with You; 
Who asks us to pause from making love with each other 
In order to focus on our love of You; 
Who asks us to pause from the cleansing of our bodies 
In order to address the cleansing of our selves; 
Who asks us to pause from anointing our heads 
In order to bring nearer the Anointing of Mashiach; 
Who asks us to pause from wearing shoes of skin 
In order to bare our skins to holy ground; 
Who chooses that for Your day of fasting 
We share our food with the hungry; 
Who chooses that for Your day to press down our selves 
We let the oppressed go free. 
Baruch attah Adonai, elohenu melech 
ha-olam, asher kid’shanu 
b’mitzvotav v’tzivanu la’anot et- 
nafsh’taynu. 
Blessed are You, Adonai, our God, 
tuler of all space-time, who 
makes us holy through Your 
commandments and commands us 
to press down our selves. 
Blessed are You, 
Adonai our God, 
Seed of seeds, 
Root of roots, 
Life of all living, 
Who brings the ear of corn to fulness 
And ripens the fruit. 
Today Your food is spread 
On one great earthly table, 
So we pause before we eat: 
Pause to make the brocha. 
Tomorrow we will eat of the harvest; 
All year we will eat of the harvest. 
This fall we will munch fresh nuts and apples, 
This winter we will eat what we have stored while the land turns 
barren, 


YOM KIPPUR + 45 
Next spring we will sow from the seed we are harvesting now, 
Next summer we will eat for the strength to turn the soil. 
But today we fast while Your meal lies ripe before us. 
We feast our eyes on the red of Your apples, 
We feast our ears on the rustle of Your cornstalks, 
We feast our hands on the prickle of Your berries, 
We feast our noses on the musk of Your melons, 
We feast our souls on the fulness of Your mercy, 
And today we will use our mouths to sing Your praises. 
Today we bring You that food which alone You have asked of us: 
Our love. 
Blessed are You, 
Adonai our God, 
Seed of seeds, 
Root of roots, 
Life of all living, 
Whose food we will eat— 
Tomorrow. 
(Amen. ) 
@#>> GO AND STUDY «® 
Philip Goodman’s The Yom Kippur Anthology (Jewish Publication Soci- 
ety) should be consulted, in addition to the books suggested at the end of 
Chapter I, especially Agnon’s Day of Awe. See also Irving Greenberg’s Guide 
to the High Holy Days (National Jewish Resource Center, NYC). For the 
Kapparot ceremony see Philip Birnbaum’s Daily Prayer Book (Hebrew Pub- 
lishing Co.). 


Acepasnsmroneateartermnentre art 
YOSEF 
“.. . and lo, my sheaf arose and also stood upright.’ (Gen. 37:7). Yosef, the fe ion, i en “guests” we invite into the sukkah during the u on, is one o u 
seven days of the harvest festival. 


Ke>> CHAPTER THREE eg 
HARVEST MOON— 
FULFILLMENT 
AT SUKKOT 
Fun moon, full harvest, full hearts. As the moon of Tishri draws to 
fullness, we are ready to celebrate Sukkot-—the-Festival of Huts. We have 
experienced the moment of rebirth, the rediscovery of our true identity, the 
re-examination of our selves, the return to our true path—at Rosh Hashanah, 
the moment of new moon. We have experienced the moment of intense 
contact and reconciliation with God at Yom Kippur, in the swelling of the 
moon. And now at the full moon we celebrate Sukkot—the festival of 
fulfillment, of gathering in the benefits that flow from repentance and 
forgiveness. The harvest that takes the form of joy and shalom, harmony, in 
the world. 
But Sukkot is not only the fulfillment of the moon of Tishri. It is also 
the fulfillment of the yearly cycle of the sun. All the sun’s work upon the 
earth comes to fullness as the harvest ripens and is gathered in. Six months 
SSS Sees 
have shown in the Preface, Pesach has eilebrated the earth’s bach and 
Shavuot, the peak of earthly power as spring moves into summer; so Sukkot 
celebrates the glory of the earth fulfilled. As the moon has rewarded our 
celebration of her birth and growth by bursting into a glowing perfect circle, 
so the earth rewards our care of seed and stalk by bursting into ripened fruit 
and grain. 
And just as Sukkot is the fulfillment of the moon and of the sun, the 
fulfillment of both nature cycles, so also in the aspect of the year as a lesson 
plan in history, Sukkot represents fulfillment: Pesach and Shavuot symbolize 
not only phases of the solar cycle, but also phases of the people’s history. 
Se Al / ieee 


48 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Pesach reminds us of the moment of liberation from slavery in Mitzrayim; 
Shavuot reminds us of the moment of transcendent contact with God at 
Sinai. In this pattern, too, Sukkot is the reminder of the fulfillment of this 
work of liberation and encounter; for Sukkot reminds us of the time of 
traveling in the wilderness under God’s close protection, making camp in 
temporary huts. 
Just as we ourselves grow from our first spiritual awakening—an awaken- 
ing to the possibility of freedom, creativity—into the passionate, awe-filled 
reality of contact with God, so we are now rewarded in our spiritual lives with 
the ingathering of spiritual riches. Our relationship with God bears psychic 
.. fruit. eal Ss’ : We walk into the sukkah—the fragile field hut, open to the light of 
moon and stars, that our forebears lived in while they gathered in the grain. 
We dangle apples and onions, oranges and peppers, from its leafy roof. And 
- we feel the joy that for a moment life is so safe, the world so loving, that we 
"can live in these open-ended huts without fear. 
So in both the lunar and the solar cycles, Sukkot comes as the time of 
redemption or fulfillment. Indeed, this special double role is in a way a higher 
affirmation of its redemptive quality—for it is Sukkot that unifies the sun and 
moon, brings the two cycles into harmony, fulfills both cycles by joining in 
» = one festival the moment of fulfillment in each one. ‘\ Qa) NM 
VViCAW NW 
L 
Yow Couin We int s berrer for i 
WAS OM" @)>> ORIGINS €€€® 
Practically all societies and cultures celebrate the harvest—the gather- 
ing in of the food that will keep rhe people alive all year. This is how the 
Torah commands that Sukkot be done: Ve 
Three times a year you shall hold a festival for Me . . . the Feast of 
Ingathering at the end of the year, when you gather in the results of 
your work from the field (Ex. 23:14-16). 
On the fifteenth day of this seventh month is the Feast of Huts 
[Sukkot], seven days for the Lord. On the first day is a holy convoca- 
tion; you shall not do any menial work. Seven days you shall bring a 
fire-offering to the Lord. . . When you have gathered in the income of 
the land, you shall take for yourselves on the first day the fruit of goodly 
trees, branches of palm trees, boughs of thick trees, and willows of the brook, and you shall rejoice before the Lord your God seven days. For 
seven days you shall dwell in huts; every citizen in Israel shall dwell in 
huts, so that your generations know that I made the children of Israel 
dwell in huts when | brought them out from the Land of Mitzrayim 
(Lev. 23:33-44). 


FULFILLMENT AT SUKKOT + 49 
After the ingathering from your threshing floor and your vat, you shall 
hold the Feast of Huts for seven days. You shall rejoice in your festival, 
with your son and daughter, your male and female slave, the Levite, 
the stranger, the orphan, and the widow in your communities. You 
shall hold festival for the Lord your God seven days, in the place that 
the Lord will choose; for the Lord your God will bless you in all your 
income and all your handiwork, and you shall be fully joyful. Three 
times a year shall all your males let themselves be seen by the face of the 
Lord your God in the place that He will choose . . . and they shall not 
let themselves be seen empty-handed, but each shall come with a gift in 
his hand—depending on the blessing that the Lord your God has given 
you (Deut. 16:13-17). 
While the Israelites had a traveling Shrine and then afterwards while 
the Temple in Jerusalem still stood, Sukkot (like all the other festivals) was 
celebrated partly by the offering-up to God of sacrificial animals. For each of 
the holy days there was a special pattern. Sukkot was unique, even compared 
with Pesach which was also a week long, in the sheer number of animals that 
were sacrificed. The fullness of number was probably felt as a symbol of 
gratitude for this moment of full harvest, the fulfillment of the year. Numbers 
29:12-34 prescribed this pattern: on the first day of Sukkot, 13 young bulls, 2 
rams, and 14 lambs; on the second day, 12 young bulls, 2 rams, and 14 lambs; 
and so on through the seven days, with the number of bulls dropping by one 
each day until on the seventh day ther ere 7 bulls, 2 rams, and 14 lambs. 
The total of the bulls, therefore, wakZ0. As we will see below, the rabbinic 
tradition found an ethical meaning in this number. 
When King Solomon built the Temple in Jerusalem, he decided to 
dedicate it at the season of Sukkot. On the eighth of Tishri—to allow seven 
days for the dedication and seven for Sukkot—he assembled all the elders and 
leaders of the people. They brought the tent of meeting, which still survived 
from the days of trekking in the wilderness, holding the Ark with the two 
stone tablets at Sinai—from the place on Mount Zion where his father David 
had set them down. And every Israelite assembled to celebrate the dedication 
of the Temple and to hear Solomon say “But is it true that God will dwell on 
earth?—Here, the most heavenly of heavens cannot contain You; far less this 
house that I have built! Still, Lord my God, turn your face to hear the prayer 
of entreaty, the prayer of praise that your servant prays to You today—so that 
Your eyes may be open toward this house day and night” (I Kings 8). 
We can only speculate why Solomon chose Sukkot as the time to 
dedicate the Temple. Perhaps it was simply the first pilgrim festival (when all 
Israel would come up to Jerusalem) after the builders had completed it. But 
perhaps he saw some analogy between the fragile sukkah—open to sky, to 
wind, to wanderers—and the house that he knew could not contain the God 
of earth and heaven. Indeed, the Book of Kings reports that God responded 


50 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
to Solomon’s prayer by warning that if Israel turned away from the command- 
ments, a stormy-tempered God would smash “this House, be it ever so high.” 
So perhaps Solomon was saying that the Temple too in all its grandeur, was 
but a fragile sukkah. 
Whether Sukkot was regularly celebrated during the period of the First 
Temple is not clear. After the return from Babylon, Nehemiah (8:17) wrote 
that from the days of Joshua’s crossing into the land of Israel until his own 
day, the children of Israel had not built the huts of Sukkot. But from 
Nehemiah’s day on, the festival was celebrated at the Second Temple. Each 
celebrant brought an etrog or citron—the yellow citrus fruit that is about 
the same size as a lemon but sweeter and spicier—to serve as the “fruit of the 
goodly tree” that is mentioned by Leviticus. Each brought as well the 
branches of a palm, of a myrtle, and of a willow. The three branches were 
held in the right hand and the etrog in the left—and they were brought 
together to be waved east, south, west, north, up, and down. Since the palm 
branch of lulav was the stiffest, most prominent element of the four species, 
the whole ceremony was called waving the lulav. (We will return to this 
waving as it is done in the modern congregation.) The Mishnah (Sukkah 
4:4-5) describes the use of the four species in an ‘exuberant ceremony that 
even—in its homage to the Altar—echoes pagan customs: 
How was the rite of the lulav fulfilled [on the Sabbath]? If the first 
festival day of the Feast fell on a Sabbath, they brought their lulavs to 
the Temple Mount and the ministers took them and set them in order 
on the roof of the portico, but the elders set theirs in a [special] 
chamber. The people were taught to say, “Whosoever gets possession of 
my lulav, let it be his as a gift.” The next day they came early and the 
ministers threw the lulavs down before them and the people snatched at 
them and beat each other. And when the Court saw that they incurred 
danger, they ordained that every one could carry his lulav in his own 
home. 
How was the rite of the willow branch fulfilled? There was a place 
below Jerusalem called Motza. Thither they went and cut themselves 
young willow branches. They came and set these up at the sides of the 
Altar so that their tops were bent over the Altar. They then blew [on 
the shofar] a sustained, a quavering, and another sustained blast. Each 
day they went in procession a single time around the Altar, saying, 
“Save now, we beseech thee, O Lord! We beseech thee, O Lord, send now prosperity.” R. Judah says: “Ani waho! save us we pray! Ani waho! 
save us we pray!” But on that day they went in procession seven times 
around the Altar. When they departed what did they say? “Homage to thee, O Altar! Homage to thee, O Altar!” R. Eliezer says: “To the Lord 
and to thee, O Altar! To the Lord and to thee, O Altar!” 


FULFILLMENT AT SUKKOT - 5] 
The Temple ceremonies included a ritual that is not mentioned in the 
Torah: the water pouring, which became the focus of the joy that the Torah 
commands for Sukkot. (On no other festival are we commanded to be joyful, 
and as a result Sukkot becomes known as the season of our joy, as Passover is 
the season of our freedorn and Shavuot the season of giving Torah.) Says the 
Mishnah: 
“The water-libation, seven days”—what was the manner of this? They 
used to fill a golden flagon holding three logs [measures] with water from 
Siloam. When they reached the Water Gate they blew [on the shofar] a 
sustained, a quavering, and another sustained blast. [The priest whose 
turn of duty it was] went up the [Altar-] Ramp and turned to the right 
where were two silver bowls. R. Judah says: “They were of plaster, but 
their appearance was darkened because of the wine.” They had each a 
hole like to a narrow snout, one wide and the other narrow, so that 
both bowls emptied themselves together. [Thick wine poured more 
slowly than water; so the drain-hole for wine was wider.] The bowl to 
the west was for water and that to the east was for wine. But if the 
flagon of water was emptied into the bowl for wine, or the flagon of 
wine into the bowl for water, that sufficed. R. Judah says: “With one 
log they could perform the libations throughout eight days.” To the 
priest who performed the libation they used to say, “Lift up thine 
hand!” for once a certain one poured the libation over his feet, and all 
the people threw their citrons at him. 
This last incident was no minor matter. The high priest of the day was 
also the king—Alexander Yannai. His double role was itself a violation of the 
ancient constitution of the Israelites, which separated royal and priestly 
powers as a check on each other. His dumping the water on his feet showed 
his contempt for the common people in both their daily life and their 
religious outlook. At one level, he scorned the offering that every Israelite, 
no matter how poor, could bring—the water—while treating the wine offer- 
ing of the rich with respect. At another level, he scorned the orally transmit- 
ted tradition of the water pouring which the priestly caste of Sadducees did 
not endorse because it was not explicitly mentioned in the written Torah. 
The folk tradition that it should be done, passed on by word of mouth, was 
honored as oral Torah by the Pharisees who had wide support among the 
people—and whose ideas were later gathered and elaborated by the rabbis of 
the Talmudic period into what we know as Judaism. The common folk 
responded to Alexander Yannai’s contempt with an outraged protest that was 
more than symbolic—pelting him with etrogs even though (or because) he 
was the king. 
The water pouring became the occasion for an outpouring of intense 
joy: 


52 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
1. “The flute playing, sometimes five and sometimes six days”— 
this is the flute playing at the Beth ha-Sho-evah. They have said: “He 
that never has seen the joy of the Beth ha-Sho-evah has never in his 
life seen joy.” 
2. At the close of the first festival day of the feast they went down 
to the court of the women where they had made a huge additional 
structure. There were golden candlesticks there with four golden bowls 
on the top of them and four ladders to each candlestick; four youths of 
the priestly stock and in their hands jars of oil holding a hundred and 
twenty logs, which they poured into all the bowls. 
3. They made wicks from the worn-out underclothes of the priests 
and with them they set the candlesticks alight, and there was not a 
courtyard in Jerusalem that did not reflect the light of the Beth 
ha-Sho-evah. 
4. Men of piety and good works used to dance before them with 
burning torches in their hands, singing songs and praises. And count- 
less Levites (played) on harps, lyres, cymbals and trumpets and instru- 
ments of music, on the fifteen steps leading down from the court of the 
Israelites to the court of the women, corresponding to the fifteen songs 
of ascents in the Psalms; upon them the Levites used to stand with 
instruments of music and make melody. Two priests stood at the upper 
gate which leads down from the court of the Israelites to the court of 
the women, with two trumpets in their hands. At cockcrow they blew a 
sustained, a quavering, and another sustained blast. When they 
reached the tenth step they again blew a sustained, a quavering, and 
another sustained blast. When they reached the court (of the women) 
they again blew a sustained, a quavering, and another sustained blast. 
They went on until they reached the gate that leads out to the east. 
When they reached the gate that leads out to the east, they turned 
their faces to the west and said, “Our fathers when they were in this 
place turned with their backs toward the Temple of the Lord and their 
faces toward the east, and they worshipped the sun toward the east; but 
as for us, our eyes are turned toward the Lord.” R. Judah says: They 
used to repeat the words, “We are the Lord’s, and our eyes are turned to 
the Lord” (Tishby, The Mishnah). 
So in the days of the Second Temple, Sukkot was a time of intense, 
ecstatic celebration. Dancing, torches, juggling, flutes, the burning of the priests’ old underclothes—all contributed to the ecstasy. The description is climaxed with the report that earlier all this was part of a sun-worshipping 
ceremony. This report is one of the few explicit memories in the rabbinical tradition of a pagan past in the heart of Jewish celebration. Since in the solar cycle, Sukkot stands close to the autumn equinox, it is no surprise that an 


FULFILLMENT AT SUKKOT + 53 
element of sun-worship had entered the Temple celebration. It is no surprise 
that the celebration had come to include gigantic candlesticks and dancers 
juggling torches—human evocations of the sun’s light and heat. It is more 
surprising that the rabbis chose to keep alive the memory of the facts. Perhaps 
their very choice—their readiness to break their usual restrictions on them- 
selves—was a testimony to the overflowing joy, the sense of fallen boundaries 
and wild abandon, that marked Sukkot in the Second Temple period. 
There are also echoes of the pagan past in the water pouring itself. It was 
intended, according to Rabbi Akiba, to remind the King of time and space to 
send the rain in its correct season. If we pour water in a seasonal rhythm, that 
will help God remember to pour water—when we need it. For in the Land of 
Israel, six months of dry weather come to an end—usually—around the time 
of Sukkot. If the drought lasts longer, it can bring disaster. So the water 
pouring, with its hint of sympathetic magic, may seem somewhat like the 
outlook of those who worshipped Baal, the Canaanite weather god. But there 
was a crucial difference. For the Baalists, there was no connection between 
the processes of history and those of nature. Each land had its own local gods 
of sun and rain, fertility; history was only the endless circle of the fruitful 
year. For the Jews, the same God Who inspired liberation and revealed the 
Torah is responsible for nature and for rain. History moves through the 
circles of the years into a spiral, reaching toward the days of peace and justice; 
and the One who brings the work of sowing to its harvest brings also every 
people’s reach for freedom to fulfillment. 
Indeed, the inclusion of this water pouring rite in the Sukkot celebra- 
tion of the Second Temple, along with the exclusion of the Baalist sexual 
orgies that had been intended to provoke the land’s fertility by imitation, 
may represent the defeat of Baalism among the Israelites in the course of the 
exile in Babylon. The prophetic attacks upon Baalist fertility orgies and upon 
the Baalist separation of the weather god’s sphere of power from that of God 
won out in the crucible of exile. So when the Temple was rebuilt, the moral 
and ethical demands of Torah—prohibiting sexual license—were joined to 
the other kinds of ceremonies that had celebrated Baal and the Sun. Both 
were incorporated in the celebrations of Sukkot—thus firmly asserting that 
the God of Torah is also the God of rain. 
This may be another way in which the tradition was asserting that 
Sukkot is fulfilling, redemptive, messianic: for what could be more messianic 
than the moment in which the formerly separate, partial, and amoral gods of 
the various nations find their truthful transmutation into the Universal Lord 
and Judge of all the earth? To celebrate this triumph properly it is necessary 
to be conscious that it has happened—and so the Mishnah reminds us of the 
pagan roots of the Temple celebration. 
Indeed, this sense of the coming unification of all the different worships 
of the world is embodied in the water itself. As Eliyahu Kitov says: 


54 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
At that hour, all rises with them; not only their Jewish brethren but 
every living being and all existence as well . . . Water remains eternal- 
ly pure for all Mankind. The waters preceded the Earth, and when the 
Earth was destroyed, the waters were not—they remained eternally 
pure. . . . So when the Earth is blessed with water—all the world’s 
inhabitants are blessed. 
And in the sacrifice of animals, as well, Sukkot was a reaching-out to 
universal humankind, in all its differences and similarities. The rabbinic 
tradition teaches that 70 bulls were sacrificed during Sukkot in order to 
celebrate the 70 nations of the earth. (This is the way Jewish tradition saw 
the multiplicity of peoplehoods it discovered in Europe, Asia, and Africa.) 
Thus during Sukkot the people of Israel became priests on behalf of all the 
peoples, interceding for them all with the God of all, asserting—even 
without their consent—that they needed the help of the God of Heaven. 
With the destruction of the Holy Temple, there ended not only the 
sacrifices of the 70 bulls but also the water pouring and the homage to the 
Altar. But the open-air sukkot themselves remained, as did the waving of 
the lulav and the beating of the willow branches. To meet the needs of 
worship in the synagogue, Sukkot had to be redefined through prayer and 
Torah reading. As the mystical aspects of Judaism were developed and 
encouraged by the Kabbalists from the 13th to the 16th century, the sukkah 
also became the home of mystical yearnings toward the unfolding aspects of 
God. How then do we celebrate Sukkot today? 
@>>> MAKING READY €€e 
From the evening after Yom Kippur on, the preparations are mostly 
physical. They can be felt as an outward, energetic exercise, a reflex from the 
introspection of the days of tshuvah. 
* People find a place for the sukkah—the backyard, an apartment house 
roof, a grassy part of campus, a public park, the synagogue lawn. They choose 
an open site, not directly under a tree—for then God would have built the 
sukkah, which the people are supposed to build themselves. They plan a 
sturdy structure that can withstand the winds. : 
* People begin to search out concrete blocks, wood, canvas, ropes, 
hammers, nails, paint, banners that will be needed to build the sukkah. They 
begin to gather s’chach, the leafy branches which will make the sukkah’s roof. 
They must be green and lively. It is not always easy to find some in a modern 
metropolis. (In Los Angeles, the municipal park service makes huge amounts 
of cut or fallen branches available to sukkah-builders. You might try your own 
local park people.) This s’chach is to be laid in an open latticework on some 


FULFILLMENT AT SUKKOT - 55 
supporting cords or planks for the roof of the sukkah—open enough to let in 
starlight but thick enough that there is more shade than sun within. 
> The building begins. If there is a Sunday between Yom Kippur and 
Sukkot, family, friends, neighbors can all join in, make a party of it, finish 
one sukkah and go on to the next. If not, ina fall evening there is still plenty 
of good time to build a simple sukkah. 
It must be no more than 10 yards high and no less than 10 handbreadths 
high, must have at least three walls, and should be decorated with fruits and 
vegetables, drawings and other hand-made decorations—sewn, knitted— 
that add to its beauty. (These decorations cannot be eaten or used in other 
ways until after Sukkot,)—~ poi 
- People seek (le i for the waving. This search—which 
nowadays is carried o ewis stores or the stalls of Jewish market- 
places in neighborhoods like the Lower East Side of Manhattan or Borough 
Park in Brooklyn—can be turned into a joyful exploration. The customer has 
a chance to compare the shape and color and freshness of a number of 
etrogim, judge how it would feel to throw one at a king, make sure that the 
pitom at its top is intact. (Sniffing its smell waits till Sukkot morning.) 
- There are also meditations that are traditional for this period. The 
11th, 12th, 13th, and 14th of Tishri were felt by the mystics to be the days of 
the four-letter Name of God—yod, hay, vav, and hay, connecting Yom 
Kippur to the days of Sukkot with their own mystical significance in regard to 
aspects of God. So each day could be greeted with contemplation on the 
Name: perhaps seeing the four letters as the elements of the Tree of Life (the 
small yod as seed, the flowing hay as the spreading roots, the tall vav as a 
trunk, the flowing hay as leaves and branches). Or the Name can be seen as a 
breath: chest empty, contracted like the yod; a breath in, hay!; the chest tall 
and full like a vav; and a breath out. . . . haaaay. This Breath is the One that 
when it becomes a word, creates and gives life to all the world; for the word 
YHVH in Hebrew can be understood as a form of the verb to be that means 
causes to exist. Thus the word that is itself a breath is the word that means 
the transformation of God’s breath, speech, into physical reality. A breathing 
exercise in which the meditator holds the Four Letters in consciousness while 
breathing could be a useful practice during these four days. 
@>> SUKKOT 
Finally, the evening of Sukkot itself arrives. (Sukkot begins the night of 
the fifteenth of Tishri. In the Diaspora, except among Reform Jews, the 
second day is also observed as a full holy day; in Israel and in Reform 
congregations, only the first.) Friends, families, or congregations bless and 
light the festival candles together, if possible in the sukkah. The evening 


56 : SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
service changes from an ordinary one only in the standing amidah, where 
there is a special paragraph inserted: 
Our God and God of our forebears, may there arise and come before 
Your face, to be accepted and seen, to be desired and heard, to be 
recalled and remembered; the remembrance and recollection of 
ourselves, and the remembrance of our forebears, the remembrance of 
Messiah child of David Your servant and the remembrance of Jerusalem 
Your holy city, and the memory of all Your people, the household of 
Israel—for deliverance and good, for grace and loving-kindness and 
compassion, for life and for peace, this day of the Festival of Huts, the 
season of our joy. Remember us this day, Lord our God, for good; recall 
us this day for blessing; save us this day for life. With a word of 
salvation and compassion, spare us and extend grace to us. Mother us 
and save us—for our eyes look toward You because You are a gracious 
and motherly King . . . Blessed are You, Lord, Who hallows Israel and 
the festival seasons. 
wD) After the service, everyone goes out to the sukkah to share some wine 
iy and food there. But first some guests—both mystical and flesh-and-blood, 
Q especially from among the poor—must be invited in. One of the great mystics 
‘=>__ of the town of Safed in the sixteenth century, Rabbi Isaac Luria (Ha-Ari or 
“ The Lion) specified that on each of the seven nights of Sukkot, one of the 
great Biblical shepherds should be invited to sit in the sukkah. Each of these 
2 seven men evoked or represented one of the S’phirot, the aspects and emana- 
tions of God. For the mystics, the S’phirot were the unfolding energy levels of 
sD, God that acted as a bridge between the Ultimate, Infinite God Who is 
[BI J 
beyond all understanding, and the created world with all the sparks of 
<— Divinity it contains. There are ten S’phirot in all, of which seven are in the 
Ss iscussable realm of contact with the created world. These seven—Chesed or 
SS Loving-kindness, Gevurah or Severity, Tiferet or Beauty, Netzach or Victory, 
Hod or Glory, Yesod or Intimacy, and Malchut or Majesty—have their 
analogues in the processes of Jewish history. Their crystallizations, as it were, 
came about in the seven great shepherds who are invited to be our guests in 
the sukkah. 
So during the seven days of Sukkot, the community could reach through 
these seven invisible mystical guests, and through’ the physically palpable 
guests from among the poor, up to the unfolding levels of God. One of the 
sukkah-builders says, before eating: 
May it be Your will, Lord my God and God of my forebears, to send 
Your Presence to dwell in our midst and to spread over us the sukkah of 
Your peace, to encircle us with the majesty of Your pure and holy 


FULFILLMENT AT SUKKOT - 57 
radiance. Give sufficient bread and water to all who are hungry and 
thirsty. Give us many days to grow old upon the earth, the holy earth, 
that we may serve you and revere you. Blessed be the Lord forever— 
Amen, amen. 
I invite to my meal the exalted guests—Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, 
Moses, Aaron, and David. 
And on each night the reader speaks directly to one of the ushpizin or 
guests: 
Abraham, my exalted guest, may it please you to have all the exalred 
guests join me and you—lIsaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Aaron, and 
David. 
And so forth, changing the guest each night. 
In recent times, some groups of Jews—especially among the participa- 
tory congregations on fellowships of chavurot—have invited other guests into 
the sukkah—particularly Jewish women of the Biblical and modern ages, 
from Sarah the Matriarch to the poet Muriel Rukeyser. And some groups 
have arranged for older Jews—living alone or in hotels and nursing homes for 
the elderly—to visit the sukkah. 
After the ushpizin, the guests, are invited in, there is a special kiddush, a 
blessing over wine to welcome and hallow the festival: 
Baruch atah Adonai eloheynu melech ha-olam boray p’ri hagafen. 
Baruch atah Adonai eloheynu melech ha-olam asher bachar-banu mi- 
kol am (or “im kol am), v’romimanu mi-kol lashon (or im kol lashon) 
v’kidshanu b’mitzvotav v’titen-lanu Adonai eloheynu b’ahavah mo- 
adim l’simcha, chagim uzmanim lI’sasson, et yom chag ha-sukkot hazeh, 
z’man simchateynu, mikra kodesh zeycher I’tziyat mitzrayim. Ki vanu 
vacharta, v’otanu kidashta mikol (or im kol) ha-amim umo-adai kad- 
shecha b’simcha uv’sasson hinchaltanu. Baruch atah Adonai mikadesh 
Yisrael v’hazmanim. 
Blessed are You, Lord our God, King of the universe, Who creates the 
fruit of the vine. 
Blessed are You, Lord our God, King of the universe, Who has chosen 
us and lifted us up from among all peoples, has made us holy through 
Your commandments, and lovingly given us, Lord our God, festivals for 
joy, celebrations and seasons for gladness—this day of the Festival of 


58 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Huts, the season of our joy. It is a holy assembly in memory of the 
Exodus from Egypt . . . Blessed are You, Lord, Who makes Israel and 
the seasons holy. 
Then the group says together the blessing for sitting in the sukkah: 
Baruch atah Adonai, eloheynu melech ha-olam asher kid’shanu b’mitz- 
votav v’tzivanu leysheyv ba-sukkah. 
Blessed are You, Lord our God, Who makes us holy through Your 
commandments, and commands us to sit in the sukkah. 
And on this first night the group adds Sheh-hechianu, blessing the One 
Who has kept them alive till the return of the Sukkot season. And then all sit 
on a seat in the sukkah, to drink the wine and eat the food. 
Traditionally, adult Jewish men have tried to sleep in the sukkah and to 
eat all their meals there during Sukkot. In the past few generations, many 
(women and men) have treated the sukkah as a sort of way station between 
camping out and living at home. Children have slept there in sleeping bags; 
some people have arranged to have at least one meal a day there; it has 
become a place to have a party that is joyful with the deeper undertones of 
ancient celebration. In Jerusalem especially, but in other Jewish communities 
as well, the Joy of the water pouring (Simchat Beit ha-Sho-evah) is recalled 
in song, dance, good food, and féstive clothing. 
THE MORNING SERVICE 
Besides the festival prayer added to the amidah, there are four special 
aspects of the Sukkot morning service: the waving of the lulav, the singing of 
the psalms of Hallel (Praise), the procession of the congregation carrying 
lulavim around the Torah; and the reading of special Torah portions for 
Sukkot. 
BENSCHING (BLESSING) LULAV 
The bundle of the lulav is made up of three myrtle twigs, two willow 
twigs, and one palm branch. They are all bound with the cut edge down, with the palm branch in the center. When the worshipper grasps the palm branch with its back toward the worshipper’s face, the myrtle should be on the right and the willow on the left. 
The point of bensching lulav is reached in the morning service after the amidah. Each worshipper then picks up the lulav bundle in the right hand and the etrog in the left, with the pitom of the etrog pointing downward (unlike the way it grows). They say the blessing of the lulav: 


FULFILLMENT AT SUKKOT - 59 
Baruch atah Adonai eloheynu melech 
ha-olam asher kid’shanu b’mitzvotav vitzivanu al n’tilat lulav. 
Blessed are You, Lord our God, King of all space-time, who makes us 
holy through his commandments and commands us concerning the 
shaking of the lulav. 
And this is followed by Sheh-hechianu, praising God for giving life to 
reach this moment. Then the worshippers shift the etrog around in their left 
hands so that the pitom is upward, and bring their left hands close to the 
tight—so that all four species are close together. Next they stretch their arms 
out frontward (facing east) and with a shaking motion pull both hands, held 
together, toward themselves—three times reaching out and pulling in. This 
is the shaking or waving. Still facing east, the worshippers stretch their arms 
out to the right and do the same waving three times; reach over their 
shoulders and again wave from outward in toward themselves three times; 
and again to the left, and toward the sky, and toward the earth. 
If some worshippers did not buy lulav and etrog before Sukkot, those who 
did can make them gifts of their own after waving. The gift can be returned, 
but traditionally while you are waving you should be conscious that the lulav 
is your own. If the congregation as a body buys the lulav and etrog, every 
member owns it. 
What is going on in the waving? There are many possibilities of spiritual 
approach: 
- Close your eyes as you wave. Focus on the rustling sound of the lulav 
and the smell of the etrog. Let them become your branches and your fruit, so 
that you are the four-in-one tree whose fruit and branches are waving in the 
wind. You. Are. The. Tree. The. Tree. Of. Life, which according to 
tradition is what the Torah is. A human being living a decent, holy life 
becomes a Torah, a Tree of Life. Such a person becomes an organic part of the 
natural world, a microcosm of the universe. 
- As you wave, be conscious that you are pulling all six directions of the 
universe toward you, for a moment the very center of all the worlds. They all 
depend on your internal clarity and unity. 
- The four species represent the four letters of the Name. The etrog looks 
like a yod; the soft and curving myrtle like a hay; the tall and springy palm 
branch like a vav; the soft and curving willow like a hay. The bringing 
together of the right and left hands unifies the Name. (It is spelled in the 
right order only for someone facing you. God? Your friends and comrades? 
Those who are not yet conscious of the Unity, since Sukkot is the moment 
when God’s Name will become One to all who live on earth?) 
- The four species are like four different kinds of Jews; the etrog, with 
both taste and smell, those who both study Torah and do good deeds; the 
palm, with tasty fruit but no smell, those who study Torah but do not act; the 


60 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
myrtle, with a smell but no taste, those who do good deeds but do not study; 
the willow, with neither taste nor smell, those who do neither. All four are 
necessary to a community—even those who neither act nor study. 
- And each new experience with waving lulav may lead to a new sense of 
what is going on. 
The lulav is to be waved every morning of Sukkot except on Shabbos. (It 
could be done communally or individually, with special joy, in the sukkah.) 
Immediately afterward, on every morning of Sukkot, Hallel (Praise) is sung. 
This is a collection of psalms—from Psalm 113 to 118—which is sung on 
each of the four Torah-based festivals and on Hanukkah as well (but not on 
the solemn holy days of Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur). For parts of these 
Psalms there are traditional tunes. 
Hallel begins with the leader of congregational prayer reciting a blessing. 
The individual participants respond “Amen” and then say the blessing 
themselves. 
Baruch atah Adonai eloheynu melech ha-olam 
asher kid’shanu b’mitzvotav vitzivanu likro et ha-Hallel. 
Blessed are You . . . Who has commanded us to call out the Hallel. 
During the “Hodu |’Adonai kitov, ki l’olam chasdo” and “Yomar na 
Yisrael ki l’olam chasdo” the lulav is waved again to the six directions of the 
world—one direction for each word, pausing for God’s name, Adonai. 
Close to the end of Psalm 118, the outcry “Please, Lord, save us! Please, 
Lord, send us prosperity” is chanted responsively: 
Ana Adonai hoshia na 
Ana Adonai hoshia na 
Ana Adonai hatzlicha na 
Ana Adonai hatzlicha na 
and during the first two lines (hosannas in English, a word made from hoshia 
na) the lulav is shaken again in six directions—two directions for each of the 
words, again leaving out Adonai. 
-When the Hallel is completed, there is a closing blessing: 
Baruch atah Adonai melech 
m’hulal batishbachot. Blessed are You, Lord, King who is praised with 
songs of praise. 
After Hallel (or in some congregations after the festival musaf or addi- 
tional service), a Torah scroll is taken out of the Ark, and everyone joins in one hakkafah or encirling procession around the Torah, chanting ‘‘Hosha- 


FULFILLMENT AT SUKKOT - 6] 
not.'’ Most of these prayers for deliverance were written by Eleazar Kalir, who 
lived in the eighth century. Each Hoshanah is arranged in alphabetic phrases 
running from aleph to tof. The order in which they are said depends on which 
day of the week is the first day of Sukkot. On Shabbos the Hoshanot are 
recited, but there is no procession; and on the seventh day of Sukkot there 
are seven processions and the day is named Hoshanah Rabbah (the great 
Hoshanah). It takes on a special character of its own, and will be discussed 
below. 
BIBLICAL READINGS 
When Sukkot begins on a weekday, the preparatory service before the 
Torah reading includes a sublime passage from the Torah on God as Loving- 
kindness personified. The passage is chanted: 
Adonai adonai eyl rachum v’chanun erech apayim v’rav chesed v’emet, 
notzeyr chesed l’alafim nosey avon vafesha v’chata-ah v’nakey. 
The Lord, the Lord, God motherly and gracious, slow to anger, bounti- 
ful with loving-kindness and truth, Who keeps loving-kindness to the 
thousandth generation, pardoning iniquity, transgression, and sin, and 
forgiving. 
The passage is chanted three times. In some congregations the custom is 
to chant it with vigor the first time, gently the second, and in a whisper the 
third—so that by the end the Loving One is experienced as the still small 
voice within. 
The Prophetic readings for Sukkot point toward the universal messianic 
transformation of the world, and thus represent in words of Torah the 
messianic vision that was embodied in the special Sukkot sacrifices while the 
Temple stood. 
On the first (and second) day of Sukkot, the Torah reading is Leviticus 
22:26—23:44. Most of this is the recitation of the festival cycle of the year, 
but it begins a paragraph earlier than it would need to, with the command- 
ment: “When a bullock, a sheep, or a goat is born, for seven days it shall be 
under its mother; from the eighth day on it may be accepted for a fire-offering 
to the Lord.” Since the reading ends with the provisions for seven days of 
Sukkot and an eighth-day festival, Sh’mini Atzeret, in its seven days/eighth- 
day formula there may be an intentional echo, a hint that the seven days of 
Sukkot are a time especially close to the Motherly One—followed by the 
wintry eighth day of Sh’mini Atzeret, a day of memorial for the dead. 
The maftir or concluding Torah portion, from Numbers 19:12-16, 
prescribes the sacrifices for the first day of Sukkot. The Prophetic reading for 
the first day is from Zechariah (14:1-21). It includes the passage that is the 


62 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
climax of the Alenu prayer in the synagogue service: ‘On that day the Lord 
shall be One and His Name One.” Zechariah describes a great convulsion, a 
battle at Jerusalem and an earthquake cleaving the Mount of Olives in two, 
but ending with Jerusalem safe. Then from all the peoples there shall come 
pilgrims to Jerusalem, to worship God and to celebrate the festival of Sukkot. 
Whichever of earth’s peoples will not go up to celebrate Sukkot, for them 
there shall be no rain—as if the relationship between God and Israel would 
then be broadened on the same terms to all the earth. 
On the second day, the haftarah is from I Kings 8:2-21. It is the 
description of Solomon’s dedication of the Holy Temple at the time of 
Sukkot: a house for God’s Name. On the Shabbos that comes in the midst of 
Sukkot, the Torah reading is Exodus 33:12-—34:26, in which Moses asks for a 
direct personal revelation of the essence of God and receives instead a 
revelation of God’s attributes of compassion and loving-kindness, concluding 
with a brief review of the festivals. The maftir is the relevant burnt offering 
from Numbers 29—that for the second day if Shabbos falls on the second day 
of Sukkot, etc. 
The haftarah, from Ezekiel 38:18-39:16, describes the last great battle of 
the future, the battle of Gog and Magog against Israel. It describes the 
stunning disaster that God will send upon Gog, so that once and for all the 
people of Israel shall be safe and God’s triumph shall be recognized through- 
out the earth. 
On most of the festivals there is traditionally assigned for reading one or 
another book from the K’tuvim (Writings or Literature) section of the 
Bible—the section made up of poems like the Psalms, novellas like the Books 
of Ruth and Esther, histories, and tragedies. At the Sukkot season, the book 
traditionally assigned is Kohelet (or Ecclesiastes), to be read either on the 
Shabbos in the middle of Sukkot or on Sh’mini Atzeret. The content of 
Kohelet feels more appropriate to the wintry, contracting atmosphere of 
Sh’mini Atzeret than to the fulfilling and expansive atmosphere of Sukkot; so 
we will examine Kohelet in the next chapter. 
HOSHANAH RABBAH 
When the Temple stood, on the seventh day of Sukkot the priests 
marched seven times around the Altar, waving the lulav, beating its leaves 
against the ground, and standing specially new-cut willow branches around 
the Altar. The historian Theodore Gaster suggests that the beating of the 
willows was a widespread custom in many cultures, where the willow symbol- 
ized fertility and the beating was intended to increase potency and procrea- 
tion. In any case, the beating of the willows and the seven processions 
survive in traditional synagogues today. 
Through the centuries, the belief grew that Hoshanah Rabbah was a special day of completion of the High Holy Days, the very last moment when 


FULFILLMENT AT SUKKOT + 63 
human life or death might be decreed by Heaven. The leader of con- 
gregational prayer often wears a white kittel as a reminder of the wearing of 
the kittel on Yom Kippur, and uses the melodies of Yom Kippur. A number of 
the special prayers for the Days of Tshuvah and Yom Kippur are added to the 
service (Avinu Malkenu and Un’taneh Tokef, and the sentences in the amidah 
focusing on the God of life). Some people stay awake through the night of 
Hoshanah Rabbah reading all five of the Books of Moses or the Books of 
Deuteronomy and Psalms, and immerse themselves in the mikveh before 
dawn. 
When the Hallel has been sung and the seven processions of Hoshanot 
have been completed, the celebrants take five willow branches, bound 
together. They chant together a number of prayerful poems, and then beat 
the willow branch five times on the ground. As the leaves fall off the willow, 
they can be seen today as a symbol of fading, falling lives, or as a symbol of 
casting off our old and dying sins. 
The willow is then saved, to be used to heat the oven where matzah is 
baked next Pesach. The lulav can also be saved for the same purpose, or used 
instead of a feather in the hunt for chametz (leaven) the night before Passover 
begins. The etrog can be made into preserves for Pesach, or whole cloves can 
be stuck into its skin so that it becomes a naturally fragrant spicebox to use at 
the havdalah ceremony on Saturday night. All these customs help bind the 
doing of one mitzvah to the doing of another, the celebration of one season to 
the celebration of another—especially Sukkot to Pesach, exactly six months 
later. 
THE SEV ENTE SUKKOT 
The Torah commands that in every seventh year, all land shall lie fallow 
and there shall be a release or annulment (shmitah) of all debts. In this way 
the land and its farmers were to have a long Sabbath, and those who had 
fallen into debt were to recover their economic equality. 
In addition, the Torah proclaims that at the Sukkot connected with this 
shmitah or Sabbatical year, the whole people—men, women, children, even 
the foreigner sojourning in the land—should assemble to hear the priests read 
the Torah so as to teach the people their obligations to observe the 
Teaching. 
The Mishnah required that this ceremony (called hak-heyl, assemble) 
take place on the first day of Sukkot following the completion of a Sabbatical 
year. (According to later commentators, this made sure that the people 
would be honoring God’s word after a year in which there had been neither 
sowing nor organized harvesting, but God’s providence had been shown forth 
without these acts of human planning.) The rabbis, the priests, and the king 
would all be involved in the reading. The readings were taken from Deuter- 
onomy: 1:1-6:19, 11:13-21, 14:22-27, 26:12-15, 17:14+20, and 27:15—26. 


64 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
The readings ended with blessings similar to those said by the high priest on 
Yom Kippur. 
The ceremony of hak-heyl fell into disuse after the collapse of the Jewish 
monarchy; but in the past generation, some Israeli settlements that observe 
the Sabbatical year have revived a symbolic form of it. Among a few 
American chavurah and synagogue congregations, there were some obser- 
vances of the ceremony in 1973 and 1980, at the ends of the last two 
Sabbatical years. The next years in which hak-heyl might be done are 1987, 
1994, 2001, and 2008. In addition to part or all of the traditional readings, 
the ceremony might include a seven-year review of how the Jewish commu- 
nity and the general society are doing in regard to preservation of the 
earth-environment and in regard to economic equality and social justice. 
@>> FOODS * ee 
CARROT AND SWEET POTATO TZIMMES 
1 Ib. carrots 3 tablespoons chicken fat (or vege- 
1% lb. sweet potatoes table far) 
1 tart apple salt and pepper 
Y, cup brown sugar and honey lemon juice and assorted spices 
Dice carrots, potatoes, and apple and cook until very tender and very little 
water left. Add rest of ingredients. Adjust to slightly spicy, tart taste. Heat 
through watching carefully so it doesn’t burn. Will serve 5-6. A white potato 
may be added. 
COOKIE DOUGH STRUDEL 
3% cups sifted flour 1 cup vegetable fat 
Y% teaspoon bicarbonate of soda 2 eggs—separated 
Ys teaspoon baking powder Ya cup orange juice 
Y) cup sugar 
Cut fat into sifted dry ingredients as for pie dough. Add egg yolks. Gradually 
add orange juice to make smooth dough. Chill. Roll into three or four leaves 
about ¥ inch thick. Whip the whites of the eggs and use to paint the leaves 
and the tops of the rolls. Paint and then put layers of jam, nuts, coconut, 
some finely diced apple, a mixture of sugar and cinnamon, and lemon rind, 
raisins. May be sprinkled with a little lemon juice if more tartness is desired. 
*Recipes by Hannah Waskow and Rose Gertz. 


FULFILLMENT AT SUKKOT - 65 
Roll as for jelly roll being sure to seal the ends and edges to avoid leaking. 
Paint top with beaten whites and sprinkle with cinnamon and sugar. Bake on 
ungreased sheet at 375° 30-40 minutes or until done. Remove pan and slice 
quickly. A filling of prepared mohn may also be used. 
MONDELBROT 
6 cups flour 1 scant cup sugar 
4 teaspoons baking powder Y |b. vegetable fat 
Ys cup water Ys cup oil 
3 eggs 1 teaspoon vanilla 
dash salt 1 teaspoon almond extract 
grated lemon rind 
Mix flour, baking powder, salt, sugar. Add beaten eggs, fat, oil, rind, extracts 
and water. May add a little more flour and water if dough is too short to 
handle. Add ¥% cup raisins, 2 cup nuts, cHerries (optional) and knead to mix 
well. Refrigerate for several hours or overnight. Shape into rolls about 2% 
inches wide and 1 to 1% inches thick and 10 inches long. Bake 350° until 
light brown. Cool slightly, cut into 1-1% inch slices and dip into mixture of 
sugar, cinnamon, dash of nutmeg, cloves and return to oven to brown lightly. 
(Place on side. Turn and repeat.) 
CINNAMON COOKIES 
4 cups flour 1 teaspoon vanilla 
4 teaspoons baking powder 1 lemon rind 
3 eggs Y% lb. vegetable fat 
Ye teaspoon salt Y, cup oil 
1 scant cup sugar Ys, cup water 
‘Mix for handling, cut into shapes, and sprinkle with mixture of cinnamon, 
sugar, nutmeg, and cloves. Bake until light brown at 375°. 
@» GO AND STUDY €& 
See Philip Goodman, The Sukkot and Simhat Torah Anthology (Jewish 
Publication Society) and Irving Greenberg, Guide to Sukkot (National Jewish 
Resource Center, NYC). For instructions on sukkah-building, see The First 
Jewish Catalog (JPS). 


cassettes tsi ietimaeNeNiletinmnmne, 
MINTZ-GANIN KETUBAH 
The autumn rains, for which we begin to pray at Sh’mini Atzeret, represent that time of the year when the desert begins to take on the nourishment which will cause the land to bring forth fruit. 


Kes CHAPTER FOUR ceeog 
SEED FOR WINTER— 
SH’MINI ATZERET 
A fer the moon of Tishri has been celebrated in its birth, its swelling, 
and its fullness, the moon begins to wane, prophesying its own disappear- 
ance. At the same moment, in the solar cycle of the year, the fields stand 
bare and the seed is stored away. In the land of Israel, farmers begin to sniff 
the smell of rain. Winter looms, the fourth season of the year. The earth 
prepares to hibernate, go underground, build up reserves of strength to make 
new life. 
The waning moon and the fourth season need a fourth festival, for we 
need to welcome winter in the world and in ourselves. Mechanical symmetry 
might have required that a fourth festival stand on its own at the outset of 
winter, as Shavuot stands at the outset of summer. But Rabbi Joshua ben Levi 
explained that when the Temple stood, we could not wait till winter to make 
the pilgrimage to the Temple in Jerusalem. Torrential rains, muddy roads— 
these meant that we must stay home. So the winter festival was placed 
immediately at the end of the fall festival, when the pilgrims were still at the 
Temple. 
Just as the spring festival of new life and liberation was not complete till 
we had counted seven weeks plus one day to the summer festival of fullness 
and revelation, so the fall festival of ingathering and redemption was not 
complete till we had counted seven days plus one day to the winter festival of 
sleeping and inwardness. When the pilgrims returned home, they needed just 
behind them not the boisterous joy of the sukkah and the water pouring, but 
the quiet celebration of a sense of inner peace. 
- 67 > 


68 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
So to meet this need we had Sh’mini Atzeret. Some translate this as the 
Eighth Day of Completion, others, the Eighth Day of Assembly. For atzeret 
means putting a boundary, restraining, collecting—either the days (and so, 
completion of the festival) or the people (and so, assembly of the multitude). 
We can understand the restraint as inward, too. While the Temple 
stood, we turned from the expansive week of the multiple sacrifices of Sukkot 
to the minimum: one bull, one ram. The Talmud teaches that this reduction 
of the sacrifice from 70 bulls to one represents God’s turning from concern 
with the 70 nations—the whole world—to a quiet téte-a-téte alone with the 
people of Israel. The approach fits well with seeing Sh’mini Atzeret as the 
inward, wintry holy day, the festival of self-restraint. 
Not only was the explicit message of Sh’mini Atzeret a measure of 
constriction, retreat, quiet—so was its medium, the implicit message of its 
form. For by tacking Sh’mini Atzeret right on to Sukkot, the Torah made 
sure that it would almost disappear from sight—like a seed disappearing into 
the ground; made sure that the tradition would speak of the three pilgrimage 
festivals—Pesach, Shavuot, and Sukkot—while almost forgetting the fourth. 
Almost—but never quite. 
It is as if this shadowy festival, this miniature celebration, was the 
yod—the tiny letter of the four in God’s most holy name. The yod is the first 
letter of the Name, but suppose we see the Name as a continuing process, a 
spiral in which the end is a new beginning and the beginning stands also at 
the end. Then the yod is a tiny seed at the end of the Name, the concentrated 
lesson of its flowering, the seed that carries meaning forward to begin the 
next saying of the Name. 
@#> ORIGINS 
In the four passages where Torah recites the festivals, Sh’mini Atzeret 
appears only twice. In Exodus 23 and Deuteronomy 16, Sukkot appears as a 
seven-day holiday, standing alone. But in Leviticus 23:36, God tells Moses 
to explain to the Israelites: 
On the eighth day you shall observe a sacred assembly and bring a 
fire-offering to the Lord; it is a solemn gathering; you shall not work at 
your occupations. ; 
And Numbers 29:35-38 specifies: 
On the eighth day you shall hold a solemn gathering; you shall not work at your occupations. You shall present a burnt-offering, an offer- 
ing by fire of pleasing odor to the Lord; one bull, one ram, seven 
yearling lambs, without blemish; the meal offerings and libations for 


SH’MINI ATZERET - 69 
the bull, the ram, and the lambs, in the quantities prescribed, and one 
goat for a sin offering—in addition to the regular burnt offering, its 
meal offering and libation. 
During the period of the Second Temple, it became the norm to pray for 
rain for the first time each year on Sh’mini Atzeret. Thus Sh’mini Atzeret 
became the specific place among the Tishri festivals to locate that part of the 
ancient Middle Eastern autumn celebration that looked forward to the winter 
rain. The Mishnah explains that rain during Sukkot would drench the lattice- 
roofed sukkah, and so would feel to those who were living there like a curse 
rather than a blessing. So the prayer for rain should wait till the sukkah 
dwelling was complete. It may also be true that by waiting to pray for rain till 
Sh’mini Atzeret, separating the water pouring of Sukkot from the rain prayer 
of Sh’mini Atzeret by one full week, the tradition kept the two from fully 
combining into one act of sympathetic magic. 
With the destruction of the Temple, the rabbis preserved the sense of 
restraint and retreat that had pervaded Sh’mini Atzeret by seeing it as a faint 
and final echo of Yom Kippur. It is the day on which the world is rewarded or 
punished through the giving or withholding of rain, and therefore the last day 
of the Tishri season on which repentance and prayer before God may bring 
forgiveness. 
@>» PRESENT PRACTICE €€e® 
Sh’mini Atzeret begins as do other Festival days. The Festival candle is 
lit and the blessing Sheh-hechianu said to praise God for keeping us alive until 
this moment. Kiddush is made over wine, and the evening service follows the 
usual Festival pattern. 
In the morning, the Hallel psalms of praise (Psalms 113-118) are sung, 
the special Festival paragraph is read in the amidah, and the yizkor memorial 
service for the dead is read. There are two Torah readings: Deuteronomy 
14:22-16:17 describes the tithing process to support the poor, the release of 
debts in every seventh year, and the liberation of slaves in the seventh year of 
their service. The brief passage from Numbers 29:35—39 describes the special 
sacrifices for the day: one bull, one ram, and seven yearling lambs. The 
Prophetic haftarah is 1 Kings 8:54-66, in which King Solomon and the whole 
people complete—on Sh’mini Atzeret—their dedication of the Holy Tem- 
ple, and the people begin their departure to their homes. 
After the Torah is read, the recitation of the Kaddish that ends the 
morning service is done with the melody used on Yom Kippur, and the leader 
of prayer puts on the Yom Kippur white robe or kittel in preparation for the 
rain prayer. 
It is in the musaf (additional) service that Sh’mini Atzeret has its 


70 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
distinctive moment, different from all the other holy days. Since the previous 
Passover, through the summer months, the congregation has been praying 
that God send dew to keep the earth moist—for there is no rain in the Land 
of Israel during those months. Now, at musaf on Sh’mini Atzeret, the prayer 
changes. 
When it is time for the standing amidah prayer to be repeated aloud by 
the person who is leading the congregation in prayer, the Ark is opened. The 
leader begins the amidah and pauses in the midst of the first of its blessings 
after ““. . . O King, Helper, Savior, and Shield!” The reader then chants a 
brief prayer: “Af-Bri is the name of the prince of rain, who gathers the clouds 
and makes them drop rain, water to adorn the earth with green. Be it not 
held back because of unpaid debts! Shield your faithful who pray for rain,” 
and completes the blessing, “Blessed are you, the Shield of Abraham. You are 
mighty forever, Lord; You revive the dead and are great in saving power.” 
The reader then chants a prayerful poem by Eleazar Kalir that is presumably a 
plea for rain, but in fact asks some thirty times not for rain, geshem, but for 
water, mayim. In a way this prayer brings all the water imagery of the Tishri 
festivals to a flood of meaning, for it reminds us of all the adventures our 
forebears had with wells and seas and rivers. 
The prayer can be sung in English to the tune of “Cool Clear Water” 
and the translation of David de Sola Pool: 
Our God, God of our forebears: 
Remember one who followed Thee as to the sea flows water 
Thy blessed son, like tree well set where rivers met of water 
Where’er he moved, Thou wast his shield; in fire or field or water 
And heaven-proved, his seed he sowed, wherever flowed a water. 
For Abram’s sake send water! 
Remember one whose heralds three beneath the tree had water, 
Whose sire was won to do Thy will, his blood to spill like water. 
Himself as high in faith could soar, his heart to pour like water. 
Where earth lay dry, he dug and found deep underground the water. 
For Isaac’s sake send water! 
Remember one, his staff who bore from Jordan’s shore o’er water, 
And rolled the stone—his love to tell—from off the well of water, 
And, wrestling hard, achieved to tire a prince of fire and water. 
Hence Thy regard him safe to bear through fire and air and water. 
For Jacob’s sake send water! 
Remember one whose ark ’mid sedge was drawn from edge of water, Thy shepherd son who could not sleep before his sheep had water. And when Thy flock did likewise burn with thirst and yearn for water, 


SH’MINI ATZERET + 7] 
He struck the rock, there gushed a rill, to give their fill of water. 
For Moses’ sake send water! 
Remember one, Thy Temple-priest, who hallowed feast with water. 
Atonement’s sun declined to night with fivefold rite of water. 
The Law was read, and then afresh he laved his flesh with water. 
Remote, in dread, he served his folk that swiftly broke like water. 
For Aaron’s sake send water! 
Remember last the tribes who fled across the bed of water, 
Thy chosen caste for whom turned sweet the bitter sheet of water. 
For Thee their race have ever shed their hearts’ best red like water. 
Without Thy face their spirits whirl as in a swirl of water! 
For Israel’s sake send water! 
And finally, the prayer comes to a climax: 
For You are the Lord our God, who makes the wind blow and the rain 
fall!—for blessing and not for disaster; for life and not for death; for 
plenty and not for famine. 
From this point on in every amidah until the musaf service on the first 
day of Pesach, the congregation mentions that God is the One Who makes 
the wind blow and the rain fall. 
Once we experience the pleading of this prayer, the Sukkot water 
pouring takes on a deeper quality. Perhaps it was intended not to coerce 
nature, but to free the people from their own dryness so they could one week 
later plead with God. It is to be our prayers that water heaven, not the water 
poured upon the ground. 
Why is the prayer for rain introduced into the blessing that praises God 
for reviving the dead? Because rain revives the parched and deadened earth, 
gives life to seeds that are buried underground. And so, as Sh’mini Atzeret 
ends, we look once more to the great revival. 
In the afternoon, although Sukkot is over and it is no longer a mitzvah to 
eat in the sukkah, the traditional custom was to eat there anyway one last 
time, as a gesture of love and respect, and on leaving to say: “Just as I merited 
to sit in this sukkah, may it be Your will that next year | merit to sit in that 
sukkah made from the skin of Leviathan. Next year in Jerusalem!” For when 
Messiah comes, according to folk legend, God will turn leatherworker (as at 
the end of Eden when God made leather garments for Eve and Adam). God 
will at last slay the primeval sea monster Leviathan, and from its skin will 
tailor the great sukkah that enfolds all Israel in peace. Under that sukkah we 
will all sit, to dine on Leviathan’s meat. No longer will we need to fear a 
monster from the deeps—the ocean deep, or the depths of our own souls. 


72 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
THEIREA DINGIOFSECEEESIASTIES 
On Shabbos during Sukkot or on Sh’mini Atzeret, the book of Kohelet or 
Ecclesiastes (Convoker or Assembler) is traditionally read as one of the five 
scrolls or megillot set aside for five of the holy days. (The others are the Book 
of Esther for Purim, Song of Songs for Pesach, Ruth for Shavuot, and 
Lamentations for Tisha B’Av.) 
The tradition gives two reasons for reading Kohelet at this season. One is 
that its melancholy overtones fit the time of year; the other, that the verse 
(11:2) “Distribute portions to seven or even to eight. . .” refers to the seven 
day/eighth-day pattern of Sukkot and Sh’mini Atzeret. On either ground, it 
would seem especially appropriate to read Kohelet during Sh’mini Atzeret. 
It is a wintry book, the summing up of a cycle of life that has revolved its 
way through joy and sorrow, war and peace, merry-making and boredom. Its 
author has concluded: “Whoever keeps watch on the wild will never sow 
seed; whoever scans the clouds will never reap . . . Sow your seed in the 
morning, and don’t hold back your hand in the evening, since you don’t 
know which is going to succeed, the one or the other, or if both are equally 
good.” It is the book of detachment, of accepting whatever you get, of 
learning to enjoy not only the peaks but also the chasms of an involved 
life—and then leaming to float beyond those very hills and valleys. It is the 
book that says: In the light of my approaching death, how disastrous is this 
disgrace? How wonderful this triumph? 
In traditional congregations, Kohelet is read just before the Torah ser- 
vice. Some congregations read it individually, as a kind of introspective 
meditation. Others read it aloud from a handwritten scroll, like the reading 
of Esther at Purim, and pronounce over it the blessing “Who has commanded 
us about the reading of the scroll”: 
Baruch atah Adonai eloheynu melech ha-olam asher kid’shanu b’mitz- 
votav vitzivanu al mikra megillah. 
And then, the blessing Sheh-hechianu, in praise of the One Who keeps us 
alive. In less traditional congregations, the song “Turn Turn Turn” (taken 
from 3:1-8) may be sung to Pete Seeger’s tune, and part or all of Kohelet may 
be read and discussed later in the day. 
#33 NEW APPROACHES «€eep 
On Sh’mini Atzeret we remember the dead in yizkor and then pray for 
water. Is our water prayer a plea for drops of rain alone—or also for tears, the 
ability to cry? Tears less exalted than those of Yom Kippur, less frightened 
than those of Tisha B’Av—but tears of memory and compassion? 


SH’MINI ATZERET + 73 
In the phrase we add to the amidah, “Who makes the wind blow and the 
rain fall,” we use ruach for wind—the word that means not only the rush of 
air in the world but also the rush of breath within our bodies and the rushing 
spirit in our souls. Just so, perhaps, the raindrops that we pray for can be the 
drops within as well as those without: the tears that fall from our bodies and 
our spirits when we are most sad and most compassionate, when we are full to 
overflowing with a sad and plaintive love. Perhaps the real water pouring that 
evokes God’s love is our pouring out of tears. 
One spiritual task of Jews at Sh’mini Atzeret may, therefore, be to open 
the wellsprings of their own compassion. The recitation of yizkor may be a 
time for the congregation not only to remember the family dead and far-off 
famous martyrs, but the deaths and cripplings that are near at hand. A few 
participatory chavurah congregations have read part of Allen Ginsberg’s 
Kaddish—his memorial poem for his mother, one of the greatest crystalliza- 
tions of the first painful generations of American Jewish life. In its transmuta- 
tion of that pain into great art, the poem not only helps tears to fall but 
achieves the same revival of the dead that we celebrate in the prayer for rain. 
There was a time one fall when Jews from all across America came 
together to plant a tree of peace on the grounds of the United States Capitol. 
It was a dismal rainy day, a dismal dispirited time in the long years of effort to 
end the Vietnam War. The tens of thousands who had gathered months 
before to call for peace had vanished, and there were only dozens in their 
place. 
One by one, people vowed to end the destruction of the trees of 
Vietnam. One by one they placed a shovel-full of earth upon the roots of the 
tree, and one by one they watered it with tears of sorrow and frustration. 
Together they sang a new and plaintive tune to an old song, a song long sung 
about the Torah: 
Etz chayim hi I’machizikim bah . . . etz chayim hi |’shalom. 
She is a tree of life for those who hold her tight; a tree of life, for peace. 
And since then on Sh’mini Atzeret it has been possible to remember and 
to Cry: 
Remember those who struggled in the desert, Lord, 
And for their sake please give us water. 
The trees of life need water, Lord. 
In this new desert, napalm-seared, 
We till a soil that rots our flesh. 
We turn a soil so poison-soaked it turns the rain to poison. 
It rains and rains, but our trees die. 
Our trees need water. 


74 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
The tree of peace needs water, Lord. 
On this deserted lawn beneath the Capitol 
We lift our puny spades against its power. 
We turn a soil so power-soaked it turns the rain to poison. 
It rains and rains, but our tree dies. 
Our tree needs water. 
The Tree of Life needs water, Lord. 
In this dry city of Your absence, Lord, 
We plant old prayers of withered meaning. 
We walk a land so soaked with fear it turns Your rain to poison. 
It rains and rains, but Torah dies. 
The Tree needs water. 
We do not pray for rain, O Lord; 
We have enough. 
We pray to be allowed to cry. 
We pray You open dry canals. 
We pray for tears: a stream of tears, 
Enough to water into strength 
The seeds that fall from helpless trees 
That we have planted. 
Remember us still struggling in the desert, Lord, 
And for Your sake please give us water. 
@> FOODS €€e> 
ANGEL-WING CHALLAH’* 
2 envelopes dry yeast 4 tablespoons vegetable oil 
Y% cup lukewarm water 2 teaspoons salt 
2 cups hot water 2 tablespoons sugar 
2 eggs, beaten poppy seeds 
7-8 cups flour (about) 
Note: pinch of saffron (brew in a little hot water and strain if you want a 
yellow challah) 
Soften the yeast in the lukewarm water. To the boiling hot water, add the 
saffron (brew) if wanted, oil, salt, and sugar. Stir until the sugar is dissolved. 
Cool and when lukewarm, not before, add the softened yeast. Reserve about 2 
“Recipe by Hannah Waskow and Rose Gertz 


SH’MINI ATZERET + 75 
tablespoons of the egg for brushing loaves later, and add the remainder to the 
liquid. Turn into a large mixing bowl, add about three cups of flour. Stir and 
beat to a smooth, thick batter. Set aside for 10 minutes; add flour to make 
dough that can be handled. Turn out on a floured board and knead until 
smooth and elastic. Shape into a ball and grease the entire surface well. Place 
in well-greased mixing bowl, cover with a clean cloth. Let rise in a warm, 
never hot, place to double in bulk. (If your oven does not have a pilot light, a 
warm pan of water in the bottom of the stove will help the dough to rise. It 
may be necessary to change the water once or twice.) Try to avoid over-rising 
as it will affect the texture of the challah. Punch down and knead again until 
dough is fine-grained. Divide dough to make two loaves. Form each portion 
into a long roll about 2 inches thick. Coil each roll to look like a coiled snake 
with its head up in the center—which is how people saw angels with their 
wings raised. (Tuck the end of the coil under the side to hold in place.) Place 
loaves on greased baking sheet. Using pans of a size that will allow the ends of 
the challah to climb for support will help. Cover, let rise to double in bulk as 
before. Add a spoonful of cold water to the reserved egg. Brush the surface of 
both loaves and sprinkle with poppy seed. Bake in a hot oven (400° F.) for 
about 15 minutes. Reduce temperature to moderate (350° F.) and bake for 45 
minutes. Test for doneness by tapping bottom of challah. They should sound 
hollow. Cool on racks. May be sliced and frozen. Very good toasted. 
@>» GO AND STUDY €€e 
See Philip Goodman, The Sukkot and Simhat Torah Anthology (Jewish 
Publication Society). 


BIRKAT HACHAMAH 
A scene from the Garden of Eden on the third day represents the creation story which is read as we complete one cycle of Torah readings and begin another. 


(>) CHAPTER FIVE Sey 
DANCING WITH 
TORAH—SIMCHAT 
TORAH 
S bimini Atzeret teaches us to put seeds of Yod, of new life, quietly 
underground, there to hibernate until the spring. But it is hard to wait. We 
need some proof of new life now. So Sh’mini Atzeret also carries within itself 
the proof of the flowering. On the second day of the festival we turn from the 
natural world to the Torah—and behold, its end leads at once to its begin- 
ning! 
About ten centuries ago, the second day of Sh’mini Atzeret was turned 
into Simchat Torah—a special holy day of Joy in the Torah. It celebrates the 
completion of the annual cycle for reading the Torah—the Five Books of 
Moses—and it is when we start afresh to read the beginning of the Torah. If 
this were all there was to it, it would be enough to see Simchat Torah as the 
festival of end-and-beginning. But there is more: the content of this end and 
this beginning underscore the lesson. For at the end of the Five Books is the 
death of Moses our Teacher; and at the beginning is the Creation of the 
World. So Simchat Torah acts out by public proclamation what Sh’mini 
Atzeret preaches as an underlying fact of life: that from seeming death comes 
profound new energy for birth. 
There is also a sense in which the emphasis on Torah underscores the 
Sh’mini Atzeret lesson of the uses of contraction, inwardness. The rabbis saw 
that the ceremonial expansiveness of Sukkot was suddenly reduced: no 
sukkah, no lulav, no water pouring, no beating of the willows—only students 
reading the black ink on white parchment. No resplendent Temple, no pomp 
of sacrifices, no widespread Land of Israel. Only the portable Torah and the 
O Wf 


78 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
tiny territory of self-determination that clings tightly around each observant 
Jewish body—the four ells of the halachic process—remain as God’s contact 
with us. And this is enough—for inwardness can flower. 
In mood as well, Simchat Torah is a way of proving what Sh’mini 
Atzeret preaches: that profound meditation, inwardness, even tears, lead not 
to depression but to jubilation. We dance with the Torah scrolls, children are 
called to the Torah and carry flags and banners, there is exalted frenzy in the 
synagogue. 
@>> ORIGINS «ee 
In Talmudic times, the second day of Sh’mini Atzeret was treated much 
like the first. The Torah reading for the day, however, was the last two 
chapters of Deuteronomy—embracing the death of Moses. But this was not 
because the Torah reading cycle ended then—for at that time a great part of 
the Jewish people read the Five Books of Moses in a three-year cycle ending 
in the third year just before the month of spring and Passover. Instead, the 
passage of Moses’ death was evidently chosen because it was felt appropriate 
to the wintry spirit of Sh’mini Atzeret. There may even have been a hint thar 
if in the history of the first years of freedom for the people of Israel, Pesach 
represented the Exodus from Egypt, Shavuot the giving of the Torah at Sinai, 
and Sukkot the period of sojourning in the wilderness, then Sh’mini Atzeret 
tepresented the time of Moses’ death. 
As for the Prophetic haftarah assigned by the Talmud for the second day 
of Sh’mini Atzeret, it was a passage from | Kings 8, close to the passages read 
on Sukkot and the first day of Sh’mini Atzeret. In it Solomon prays during 
the dedication of the Temple. Among other prayers, he asks God to forgive 
the people and send rain even if they should sin and God be inclined to shut 
up the founts of heaven. It is perhaps this passage that seemed especially 
appropriate for Sh’mini Atzeret. 
But during the next period of Jewish history, the second day of Sh’mini 
Atzeret became Simchat Torah, a distinctive holy day. That happened while 
the geonim—leading rabbinic scholars of the Babylonian Diaspora, from the 
6th to the 11th century—were respected and followed by the whole Jewish 
world. Under the leadership of the geonim, an annual cycle for reading the 
Torah became the custom of almost all Jews. The geonim developed the 
special celebration of Simchat Torah, defining it as the end of reading the 
Torah in the new one-year cycle. They also redefined the haftarah as the first 
portion of the Book of Joshua, which in an historical sense continues the 
story from Moses’ death. And later they decided that the cycle should not 
only end on Simchat Torah but begin there as well, with the reading of 
Genesis I. 


SIMCHAT TORAH - 79 
In mood, Simchat Torah has become the modern equivalent of the Joy 
of the water pouring celebration that in Temple days characterized the first 
day of Sukkot. The children of Israel dance and sing, and create special 
ceremonials for honoring and reading the Torah. 
@3>> PRESENT PRACTICE €€e 
The special celebration of Torah begins in the evening after the first day 
of Sh’mini Atzeret. In many congregations there have been celebrations all 
afternoon, in which the various circles of the burial society, the tzedakah 
collective, the Talmud-study group, etc., have all had meals and parties. 
Everyone is brimful of good spirits—and many, of real schnapps. So by the 
time of evening and the Maariv service, the congregation is often a little 
tipsy. 
After Maariv, the congregation takes all the Torah scrolls it owns out of 
the Ark, in order to do seven hakkafot, or circlings with them. (Some 
communities then light a candle in the empty Ark so that the light of Torah 
should not go dark there.) In the hakkafot, the scrolls are carried by dancing 
congregants around the raised pulpit area or around the prayer hall—or even 
around the building itself, with excursions into the streets. 
The actual carrying of the scrolls is shared among all the congregants. 
Even in synagogues where women are traditionally segregated, on Simchat 
Torah they are welcomed into the main sanctuary, there to touch and kiss 
the Torah scrolls. And children join in the processions—often carrying flags 
with an apple impaled on the flagpole and a candle burning in the apple. 
(Perhaps this is a displaced version of the burning torches the Levites used to 
juggle at the water pouring celebrations in Jerusalem?) 
The seven hakkafot provided Kabbalists with an opportunity to see in 
Simchat Torah a microcosm and a unification of the seven days of Sukkot. 
We have described in Chapter III how seven guests came day by day to the 
Sukkah to represent the seven S’phirot or aspects, emanations, of God. On 
Simchat Torah, these seven turn into the seven circlings of the Torah. And 
since these circlings take place not on seven different days but within one 
day, Simchat Torah is the time when the seven S’phirot fuse into Unity, show 
that they are in fact emanations of the Holy One. 
For this reason, the seven hakkafot have long been associated with the 
seven lower S’phirot, those emanations from God that make tangible contact 
with the world. In recent years some congregations have been developing a 
practice whereby the forms and rhythms of the seven dances, the melodies 
used for each one, the stories to be told, colors of banners—all are differenti- 
ated, each tuning in to one of the S’phirot so that in the very bones and 
muscles of the Torah-dancers the various aspects of God are acted out. Thus 


80 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
the gentle and flowing rhythms of Chesed, Loving-kindness, are quite differ- 
ent from the strong and stately rhythms of Gevurah, Power. (For more details 
on the S’phirot, see Chapters III and XI.) For this to work, grouplets of the 
congregation have to be asked in advance to wrestle with each of the S’phirot 
and to plan a dance, a melody, a color for each one. 
While the differences from hakkafah to hakkafah are acted out, the 
hakkafot are also tied together with a continuing thread of prayer. As each 
one is danced, the dancers sing: 
Ana Adonai, hoshi-a-na; ana Adonai, hatzlicha-na, ana Adonai, 
aneynu—b’yom kareynu. 
Lord, please save us! Lord, please prosper us! Lord, please answer on 
the day that we cry out. 
Between the repetitions of this pleading chorus there march in alpha- 
betic procession the verses that address God, from aleph to tof, as Aid of the 
desperate, Bearer of righteousness, Cleanser of hearts, Defender of the fallen. 
So not only the Torah as a whole but the letters that comprise her, not only 
the Holy One as a Unity but the S’phirot that emanate from Him—the whole 
of the Creation and the whole of the Creator—are brought together for 
redemption. 
After the dancing, all but one of the Torah scrolls are returned to the 
Ark, and the congregation reads the last two chapters of Deuteronomy, 
dealing with the death of Moses. It is the only Torah passage that is read at 
night, and the only one never read on Shabbos. Aside from the practicalities, 
perhaps this has to do with the relationship between night, sleep, and 
death—and with an unwillingness to recount the death of Moses on Shabbos. 
Next morning that passage is reread and the first chapter of Genesis, dealing 
with the seven days of Creation, is added. In many modern American 
congregations, both passages—the whole end-and-beginning—are read in 
the evening, probably out of the experience that many fewer congregants will 
come in the morning if Simchat Torah falls on a workday. The haftarah from 
the Book of Joshua describes Joshua's accession to the leadership of Israel, 
after Moses’ death, and his preparations for crossing over the River Jordan 
into the Land of Israel. 
Thus the readings reassert the cycle of death-into-life at two levels: the cosmic level in which Moses’ death leads straight to the creation of the world, and the historical level in which it leads straight to new leadership and 
the beginning of a new task. We are being taught, as it were: “The building of a new society is like the creation of a new world.” 
On Simchat Torah, the Torah dancing begins with the physical dance with physical scrolls; but the dancing mood is then extended into the process 


SIMCHAT TORAH + 8] 
of reading the Torah. The reading takes a playful turn, one in which the text 
itself is tossed from reader to reader as ballet dancers might toss one of 
themselves. The whole congregation—even those usually left on the 
fringes—gets involved. Not just a few people, as on any normal festival, are 
called up to read from the Torah—but every eligible adult. This is usually 
accomplished by having the first two-thirds of the Deuteronomy passage read 
over and over, as many times as necessary; but in some congregations, all the 
adults are called up together, as a kahal, and in still others, zany subgroups— 
all firstborns and then all others, for instance—are called up. 
The aliyot are extended not only to all the adults who might usually be 
bypassed, but even to all the children—kol ha-n’arim-—under the age of bar 
and bat mitzvah. They are called up with a prayer shawl spread above them so 
as to encompass all at once, and a token adult with them to represent and 
fulfill the congregation's formal obligation. Once again part of Deuteronomy 
is read, and when the children are finished the whole congregation recites 
Jacob’s blessing over Menashe and Ephraim (Gen. 48:16-20): “May the 
angel who has redeemed me from all evil, bless these children . . .” 
When this congregation-wide reaffirmation of the Torah has been ful- 
filled, the community focuses itself around two highly respected members— 
one who is called up as chatan Torah or kallat Torah—bridegroom or bride of 
the Torah—to complete the reading, from Deuteronomy 33:27 to the end; 
and the other, as chatan B’reshit or kallat B’reshit, bridegroom or bride of “In 
the Beginning,” to begin the reading all over again. In some congregations, 
the Torah scroll is unrolled the whole way and held by the congregants in a 
huge circle around the room. Thus the end and the beginning stand next to 
each other, ready to be read from one parchment panel to the next; and the 
congregation is encircled not only figuratively but literally—letter by letter— 
by the Torah. 
Cecil Roth has pointed out that the chatan Torah tradition was built 
upon the custom of the congregation’s rejoicing with every newly married 
bridegroom on the Shabbos after the first seven days of his marriage—a 
celebration in which he was called to the Torah with a flowery introduction, 
showered with candies while he arose, and handed back to his seat with a 
Torah scroll to hold for the rest of the service. Much of this panoply is or was 
part of the ceremonial for Simchat Torah in many traditional congregations. 
The special formulas for calling up the two special readers on Simchat 
Torah read like unutterably solemn requests for permission from God to read 
the Torah. In the celebratory atmosphere of the evening, however, the 
Mereshut Ha’eyl and Mereshut Haromam take on a humorous tone as well, as 
praise after praise is twirled in spiral after spiral upon God and the Torah: 
With the permission of God, the great, powerful and awe-inspiring, 
and with the permission of the precious Torah which is richer than fine 


82 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
gold and precious pearls, and with the permission of the holy and pure 
Sanhedrin, and with the permission of the learned heads and leaders of 
academies of the Torah, and with the permission of the elders and the 
young there assembled, I would open my lips in lauding hymn to sing 
the praise of God who dwells in light. He has given us life and sustained 
us in purifying reverence of Him, and has brought us to the happiness of 
this rejoicing in His Torah which gladdens the heart and enlightens the 
eyes. The Torah gives life with riches, honor, and glory. It makes 
happy those who walk in its ways of goodness and right. By adding to 
their strength it lengthens the days of those who love it and keep it 
with all its guiding commands, who occupying themselves with it cling 
to it with reverence and love. 
May it be Thy will, Almighty God, to give life with Thy loving- 
kindness and crowning glory to ________ who has been chosen to 
complete the reading of the Torah. May he be singled out for a life with 
honor and happy companionship. Guide him in purity as he foliows 
Thy light. Mayest Thou direct him and crown him by teaching him 
with Thy instruction of right. Keep him from all harm as Thou wilt give 
him Thy support, clearly sustaining him and bearing him ever forward. 
Give him delight and maintain him in that which is right among the 
people Thou hast created. Draw him near to Thee in Thy love and 
keep him from all trouble and distress. Strengthen him, uphold him 
and be his support in his humility of spirit. 
Arise, arise, _________, chatan Torah, and give glory to God the 
great and awesome. From the God of awe may there come to you 
the reward of seeing children and children’s children occupied with the 
Torah and carrying out its commandments among their cleansed and 
purified people. May you be privileged to share in the joy of rebuilding 
the Holy Temple, and may your countenance reflecting glory shine 
with righteousness. May we see the realization of the prophecy of Isaiah 
who was filled with the spirit of counsel and insight and who said 
“Rejoice with Jerusalem and be glad in her. Rejoice with her in joy all 
you who are mourning for her” in grief and sorrow. 
Arise, arise, _______, chatan Torah, with the permission of all 
this holy congregation, and complete the reading of the Torah. Arise 
, chatan Torah. 
With the permission of God who is exalted above all blessing and 
hymns, who is awesome above all praise and song, who is wisdom of the heart and might, power and strength, and who as Lord of all creation 
rules the world. 
And with the permission of the Torah preciously preserved and 
honored, which is His foremost thousandfold treasured possession, that 


SIMCHAT TORAH + 83 
Torah which in its perfect purity revives and restores the soul, that 
Torah which was given to Israel as a heritage to be realized and 
preserved, that Torah studied by us from beginning to end, that Torah 
which is the crown of glory of Him who holds back strife and who gives 
power to those in authority, to the heads of the academies of Torah and 
the heads of far-flung scattered Israel. 
And with the permission of this holy and joyous community, both 
young and old of every group gathered here this day for the rejoicing of 
the Torah, closing and then reopening its reading with reverent joy, 
cherishing it as on the day when it was given in its glory, esteeming it as 
a new experience and not as something past and finished, thirsting to 
draw from it radiant glory with rejoicing as it brings happiness to the 
heart, removes care and gives its comfort to delight the soul of those 
who glory in it and pore over it in its Scriptural text with interpreta- 
tions in Mishnah, Talmud, and rabbinic story. 
And with the permission of those who hasten to bring their 
children to the house of prayer and who follow its guiding precepts— 
great be their reward from Him who is the source of all strength and 
may abiding joy rest on their head—and who are yearning to see the 
rebuilding of His chosen Temple in the Holy City. 
Now by us unitedly the choice has been made, and from this 
congregation one has been selected to be accorded high honor. He is 
one who is true-hearted, who walks in the true paths following right 
and kindness. His heart has uplifted him and his spirit has stirred him 
to be the first to begin the reading of the Torah. Therefore, arise and 
gird yourself with strength, ____. Come forward take your stand 
beside me and read the story glorifying God for His creation of the 
world. May we all continue to read on daily, steadily, uninterruptedly, 
from beginning to end so that we may ever remain true to this Torah. 
You have been chosen for the privilege of publicly beginning the 
fulfillment of this religious duty. How good is this for you and may your 
reward be overflowing. May your blessing from your Creator be gener- 
ous and be bountifully spread, and may all who honor the Torah as a 
diadem of light be themselves honored and growing in strength and 
happiness. Arise, arise, ___, chatan B’reshit, at the call of all 
this holy congregation to bless the great and awesome God, and we all 
will seal your blessing with a fervent Amen. Arise _________, chatan 
B’reshit. 
As the reader approaches the last verses of the Torah, the whole 
congregation stands, and when the last words are completed—‘which Moses 
had done before the eyes of all Israel, asher asah Moshe l’eynai kol Yisrael” — 
the whole congregation heralds the end of the Book of Deuteronomy and of 


84 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
the Torah by chanting together: “Chazak chazak, v’nitchazeyk. Be strong, be 
strong; let us strengthen each other.” 
Then as the reading shifts to the beginning of the Torah and the Seven 
Days of creation are read, many congregations respond in a good-humored, 
joyful way: with a “bom-ba-bom, bom bom bom bom bom-bom!” after the 
completion of “And there was evening and morning. . .” when each day has 
been created. 
When the Torah scrolls are returned to the Ark, several special songs 
are sung, among them “Sisu v’simchu, Be glad and rejoice in Simchat Torah 
and give honor to the Torah . . . for she is our strength and our light.” 
Sisu v’simchoo b’simchat Torah oo-t’nu kavod la Torah. Ki tov sachra 
mikol s’chora, mi paz oomifninim y’karah. Nagil v’nasis nagil v’nasis 
b’zot haTorah haTorah. Ki hi lanu oz, ki hi lanu oz, 02, 0z v’ora. 
Since Simchat Torah is the only second day of a festival that has its own 
liturgy and practice quite distinct from that of the day before, there are 
certain peculiarities in its celebration in communities that do not celebrate 
second days of the holidays. In Reform synagogues and in Israel, Simchat 
Torah is combined with Sh’mini Atzeret. In Israel, however, it has become 
the custom to dance hakkafot with the Torah in the public streets on the 
night after Sh’mini Atzeret, in order to coincide with the public dancing in 
the Diaspora. 
@3> NEW APPROACHES €€€® 
Three developments in recent years have given a new dimension to 
Simchat Torah. One of these is that some congregations have focused on the 
traditional involvement of children, and have introduced a special ceremony 
in which all the children who have just begun their Jewish studies rise to 
affirm their intention to study Torah. They receive the congregation’s bless- 
ing, perhaps a small prayerbook, and some honey or honeycake. 
The second is that during the 1960s, young Jews in the Soviet Union 
began to use the public hakkafot as an opportunity to affirm and celebrate 
their Jewishness in public—even if they defined it in secular rather than 
Torah-centered ways. As the crowds dancing near the Moscow and Lenin- 
grad synagogues each Simchat Torah grew into tens of thousands, the 
Western press and Western Jewish visitors began to attend the celebrations, 
and they became a symbol of the insistence of Soviet Jews on their desire and 
right to live Jewishly or to leave the Soviet Union. As a result, the move- 
ment in Israel and the West to assert solidarity with Soviet Jews in their 
pursuit of these rights began to dedicate public hakkafot on Simchat Torah to 
freedom for Soviet Jewry, or to hold mass rallies on or near Simchat Torah. 


SIMCHAT TORAH - 85 
Finally, in some chavurot during the 1970s there emerged a strong 
interest in new forms of Jewish dance and body movement as an expression of 
Jewish spirituality, and because of the traditional dancing orientation of 
Simchat Torah there began to grow up a custom of celebrating the new dance 
forms at Simchat Torah time. 
@» GO AND STUDY «ee 
See Philip Goodman’s The Sukkot and Simhat Torah Anthology (Jewish 
Publication Society). 


th On RF Ser ZI no (ye cH WA ) | Mf 
re 4 h 4 
he mii rey 24 
rere y ys 
; iat ‘i i 
CHANNUKAT HABAYIT 
“a psalm for the dedication of the house. . .”’ In ma ny homes Psalm 30 is sung after Ma-oz Tzur during the week oF Hane kkah. 


Fes CHAPTER SIX «ey 
DARK OF THE SUN, 
DARK OF THE 
MOON—HANUKKAH 
After the explosion of holy days in Tishri, there is no festival for two 
full months. From Sh’mini Atzeret on the 22nd and 23rd of Tishri through 
the whole month of Cheshvan and on till the twenty-fifth of Kislev, there are 
only the new moons and Shabbos to celebrate. The Jewish people rest from 
the seventh month, the sabbatical month that is full of holy rest days—which 
is to say, we work full-time at our ordinary work. 
By the twenty-fifth of Kislev, we are ready to experience the moment of 
winter that was foreshadowed by Sh’mini Atzeret. By the twenty-fifth of 
every lunar month, the moon has gone into exile. The nights are dark, and 
getting darker. And late in Kislev, we are close to the moment of the winter 
solstice—when the sun is also in exile. The day is at its shortest and the night 
at its longest, before the sunlight begins to return. It is the darkest moment of 
the year, the moment when it is easiest to believe that the light will never 
return, the moment it is easiest to feel despair. 
At this dark moment, we celebrate Hanukkah—the Feast of Dedica- 
tion—by lighting candles for eight nights. Night after night, the candle-light 
increases. And night after night, we make our way into, through, and out of 
the darkness of the sun and moon. We experience and feel the turn toward 
light from the moment of darkness, the turn toward salvation from the 
moment of despair. 
eq» €€e 
RT as 


88 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
#>> ORIGINS 
Hanukkah is the only one of the traditional Jewish festivals for which we 
have a clear, nearly contemporaneous historical statement about how and 
why it started, on whose initiative. And yet. . . there remain some mysteries 
about its origins. 
To everyone it is clear that in its present form, Hanukkah dates back to 
the struggle led by the Maccabees—a family from the priestly tribe—against 
the Hellenistic overseers of the Land of Israel and against Hellenized Jews, 
from 169 to 166 B.C.E. 
The Maccabean war was a fusion of anti-colonial and civil war. Anti- 
ochus Epiphanes, the Hellenistic King of the Syrian branch of Alexander’s 
empire, had decreed that local religions, including Judaism, be rooted out. 
Circumcision, kosher food, and Shabbos were outlawed on pain of death. 
Pagan rituals and sacrifices were instituted at the Holy Temple in Jerusalem 
and at shrines throughout the land. Many Jews, filled with admiration for the 
worldly wisdom and power of Hellenistic culture, followed the direction and 
obeyed the decrees of Antiochus. 
But others, deeply committed to Torah, were filled with fury at the 
oppressive decrees and with revulsion at the cooperation of their compatriots. 
They rallied under the leadership of Mattathias the priest, a Hasmonean who 
lived in Modin, and of his five sons—who came to be called the Maccabees. 
After three years of guerrilla warfare in the hills and forests against the regular 
armies of Antiochus and his collaborators in the Jewish community, the 
Maccabean forces won. They recaptured Jerusalem in 166 B.C.E., and set 
out to rededicate the Holy Temple. 
During the next century, the deeds of the Maccabees were recorded and 
celebrated: 
But Judah and his brothers said: “Now that our enemies have been 
crushed, let us go up to Jerusalem to cleanse the temple and rededicate 
it.” So the whole army was assembled and went up to Mount Zion. 
There they found the temple laid waste, the altar profaned, the gates 
burnt down, the courts overgrown like a thicket or wooded hillside, 
and the priests’ rooms in ruin. They tore their garments, wailed loudly, 
put ashes on their heads, and fell on their faces-to the ground. They 
sounded the ceremonial trumpets, and cried aloud to Heaven. 
Then Judah detailed troops to engage the garrison of the citadel 
while he cleansed the temple. He selected priests without blemish, 
devoted to the law, and they purified the temple, removing to an 
unclean place the stones which defiled it. They discussed what to do with the altar of burnt-offering which was profaned, and rightly decided to demolish it, for fear it might become a standing reproach to them 


HANUKKAH + 89 
because it had been defiled by the Gentiles. They therefore pulled 
down the altar, and stored away the stones in a fitting place on the 
temple hill, until a prophet should arise who could be consulted about 
them. They took unhewn stones, as the law commands, and built a 
new altar on the model of the previous one. They rebuilt the temple 
and restored its interior, and consecrated the temple courts. They 
renewed the sacred vessels and the lamp-stand, and brought the altar of 
incense and the table into the temple. They burnt incense on the altar 
and lit the lamps on the lamp-stand to shine within the temple. When 
they had put the Bread of the Presence on the table and hung the 
curtains, all their work was completed. 
Then, early on the twenty-fifth day of the ninth month, the 
month Kislev, in the year [164 B.C.E.] sacrifice was offered as the law 
commands on the newly made altar of burnt-offering. On the 
anniversary of the day when the Gentiles had profaned it, on that very 
day, it was rededicated, with hymns of thanksgiving, to the music of 
harps and lutes and cymbals. All the people prostrated themselves, 
worshipping and praising Heaven that their cause had prospered. 
They celebrated the rededication of the altar for eight days. There 
was great rejoicing as they brought burnt-offerings and sacrificed peace- 
offerings and thank-offerings. They decorated the front of the temple 
with golden wreaths and ornamental shields. They renewed the gates 
and the priests’ rooms, and fitted them with doors. There was great 
merry-making among the people, and the disgrace brought on them by 
the Gentiles was removed. 
Then Judah, his brothers, and the whole congregation of Israel 
decreed that the rededication of the altar should be observed with joy 
and gladness at the same season each year, for eight days, beginning on 
the twenty-fifth of Kislev [I Maccabees 4:36-59]. 
Maccabaeus with his men, led by the Lord, recovered the temple and 
city of Jerusalem. He demolished the altars erected by the heathen in 
the public square, and their sacred precincts as well. When they had 
purified the sanctuary, they constructed another altar; then, striking 
fire from flints, they offered a sacrifice for the first time for two whole 
years, and restored the incense, the lights, and the Bread of the 
Presence. This done, they prostrated themselves and prayed the Lord 
not to let them fall any more into such disasters, but, should they ever 
happen to sin, to discipline them himself with clemency and not hand 
them over to blasphemous and barbarous Gentiles. The sanctuary was 
purified on the twenty-fifth of Kislev, the same day of the same month 
as that on which foreigners had profaned it. The joyful celebration 
lasted for eight days; it was like the Feast of Huts (Sukkot), for they 
recalled how, only a short time before, they had kept that feast while 


90 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
they were living like wild animals in the mountains and caves; and so 
they carried garlanded wands and branches with their fruits, as well as 
palm fronds, and they chanted hymns to the One who had so trium- 
phantly achieved the purification of his own temple. A measure was 
passed by the public assembly to the effect that the entire Jewish race 
should keep these days every year [I] Maccabees 10:1-8]}. 
These passages seem clear: Hanukkah was a kind of rerun of Sukkot, the 
Festival of Huts, because the Maccabean guerrillas had been unable to 
celebrate Sukkot in its proper season. That is why Hanukkah lasted eight 
days, the term of Sukkot plus its conclusion, Sh’mini Atzeret. It celebrated 
the Maccabean victory and the rededication of the Temple. Since the First 
and Second Temples were both dedicated at the season of Sukkot, the 
reenactment of Sukkot may have seemed especially appropriate to rededicate 
the Temple. So from | and II Maccabees, the story seems fairly clear and 
simple. 
But Jewish tradition about Hanukkah is not so simple. The books of the 
Maccabees themselves became an issue. They seem to have been treated as 
holy books by the Greek-speaking Jews of Alexandria. But the rabbis never 
regarded them as holy, never entered them among the books that made up 
the Jewish Bible. And it was the rabbis who determined what became Jewish 
Tradition. Ironically enough, these books that celebrated the Maccabees’ 
victory over Hellenism survived not in Hebrew but only in the Greek 
language. Greek became one of the common tongues of the eastern 
Mediterranean as Hellenism grew stronger over the next few centuries. And 
it was the most Heilenized Jews who most honored these memorials of 
resistance to Hellenism. 
Indeed, the Maccabean books survived into modern times only because 
some of these Hellenized Jews became recruits to Christianity, and brought 
with them the assumption that these Books of the Maccabees were holy 
writings. The Christian Church then included Maccabees among its version 
of what it called the “Old Testament.” They were among the books, avail- 
able in Greek rather than Hebrew, that the early Church father Jerome called 
“the Apocrypha.” But they held no honored standing among those Jews who 
continued being Jewish. 
For the classic Jewish view of the origins of Hanukkah, therefore, we 
must turn to the Talmud. Here we find Hanukkah in a most peculiar 
position. It is the only one of the traditional festivals that does not have a 
place in the Mishnah—the earlier level, or layer, of the Talmud. And in the 
later layer—the Gemara—it is treated in a very off-hand way, without the 
focused attention that is normal for deciding how to observe a holy day. 
The rabbis are discussing what kinds of candles may be used for Shabbos 
when one of them asks, rather casually, whether the rules for Hanukkah 
candles are different. They explore this for a bit, talk about how the candles 


HANUKKAH - 9] 
are to be lit, and then one of them says, as if he cannot quite remember, 
“What is Hanukkah?” They answer him: 
Our rabbis taught: On the twenty-fifth of Kislev [begin] the eight 
days of Hanukkah, on which lamentation for the dead and fasting are 
forbidden. For when the Greeks entered the Temple, they defiled all 
the oils in it, and when the Hasmonean dynasty prevailed over them 
and defeated them, they searched and found only one bottle of oil 
sealed by the High Priest. It contained only enough for one day’s 
lighting. Yet a miracle was brought about with it, and they lit [with 
that oil] for eight days. The following year they were established as a 
festival, with Hallel and Thanksgiving [Shabbat 21b]. 
And at once the rabbis go back to discussing the candles. They have no 
more to say about the internal divisions of the Jews, the revolt against 
Antiochus, the victory of the Maccabees, the rededication of the Temple. 
Why this cautious attitude toward Hanukkah? 
The reason is that the rabbis were not happy with the Maccabean 
approach to Jewish life. They were writing in the period when similar revolts 
against Rome, seeking to win the Jews political independence, to turn Judea 
into a rocky fortress, and to toughen the Jewish people had been systemati- 
cally and brutally smashed by the iron fist of Rome. Only the rabbinical kind 
of power—the power not of rock but water, fluid and soft from moment to 
moment and yet irresistible over the long run—had survived. Only the 
rabbinical kind of power had protected and preserved Jewish peoplehood. 
Moreover, the Maccabees had made themselves and their offspring 
kings, after expelling the Syrian—Greek empire. In itself, that was a violation 
of the ancient Israelite constitution, which requires the priests and the king 
to come from different tribes and thereby created a check-and-balance system 
between religious and political power. Even worse in the eyes of the rabbis, 
the Hasmonean kings—despite their anti-imperial, anti-assimilationist ori- 
gins—had invited the Roman Empire to become protectors and overlords of 
the Jewish kingdom, paving the way for the ultimate Roman conquest. And 
worst of all, the Hasmonean kings sided with the Sadducees, the priestly 
upholders of the primacy of Temple sacrifice as a channel to God, against the 
Pharisees—forerunners of the rabbis who saw prayer and the study and 
interpretation of Torah as the path to God. 
All these Maccabean ways of exercising power seemed to the rabbis a 
subtle surrendering to the habits of the Gentiles—ironically, a form of 
assimilation—as distinct from pursuing a life-path that the rabbis saw as 
authentically Jewish. So in retrospect the rabbis were critical of the meaning 
and ultimate outcome of the Maccabean revolt. And so, without utterly 
rejecting the national liberation movement, they refocused attention away 
from it toward God’s miracle—toward the spiritual meaning of the light that 
burned and for eight days was not consumed. 
As a later commentator suggested, the single bottle of oil symbolized the 


92 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
last irreducible minimum of spiritual light and creativity within the Jewish 
people—still there even in its worst moments of apathy and idolatry. The 
ability of that single jar of oil it for eight days symbolized how with 
iny amount could unfold into an infinite supply of spiritual 
riches. Infinite, because the efehth day stood for intnity. Since the whole 
universe was created in seven days, eight is a symbol of eternity and infinity. 
It was this way of understanding that became the Jewish norm—and 
remained so till very recently. Yet even this exploration of the internal 
debate over Hanukkah within the Jewish people does not exhaust the ques- 
tion of its origins. Is it merely accidental and historical that the date of the 
desecration of the Temple in 169 and of its rededication in 166 was the 
twenty-fifth of Kislev—at the waning of the moon nearest the winter sol- 
stice? 
There is a great deal of evidence that in much of the eastern Mediterra- 
nean and the Middle East, the winter solstice was a time for imploring the 
sunlight to return and celebrating its readiness to do so. In Rome, the 
twenty-fifth of December was the birth-day of the Unconquerable Sun. In 
Persia, at the winter solstice the common people set great bonfires and their 
tulers sent birds aloft bearing torches of dried grass. 
It is a short leap to surmising that the Syrian Greeks may have chosen 
the twenty-fifth of Kislev as a time to desecrate the Temple by making their 
own sacrifices there precisely because it was a time of solar and lunar 
darkness, the time of the winter solstice and the waning of the moon. And it 
is a short leap to surmise that the Maccabees, when they took the anniversary 
of that day as the day of rededication, were rededicating not only the Temple 
but the day itself to Jewish holiness; were capturing a pagan solstice festival 
that had won wide support among partially Hellenized Jews, in order to make 
it a day of God’s victory over paganism. Even the lighting of candles for 
Hanukkah fits the context of the surrounding torchlight honors for the sun. 
Some commentators have objected that Hanukkah cannot be a solstice 
festival because it is tied to the lunar, not the solar, cycle. But this objection 
ignores the fact that the festivals that are most clearly solar—Sukkot and 
Pesach, the festivals of fall and spring—are nevertheless tied to the full moon 
for their dates. The objection also ignores the fact that Judaism insists on 
keeping the sun and moon cycles in tension with each other in its entire 
calendar—never adopting either a purely lunar or a purely solar calendar, but 
insisting that each be corrected by the other. Moreover, if Hanukkah is not 
merely a solstice but a darkness festival, then the twenty-fifth of Kislev is the 
perfect time. In some years, the solstice day itself would be a night of bright 
full moon—especially powerful in an agrarian-pastoral culture with few artifi- 
cial lights. So even the solstice itself would feel less like the darkest day of the 
year on such a moonlit night. By setting Hanukkah on the twenty-fifth of the 
month, the Jews made sure that the night would be dark. By setting it in 
Kislev, they made sure the day would be very short and the sun very dim. 


HANUKKAH + 93 
It may even be that the Maccabees’ desire to celebrate a late Sukkot, or 
to celebrate this newly Judaized solstice festival in ways reminiscent of 
Sukkot, was tied to Sukkot’s earlier career as in part a festival of the sun. As 
we have seen in our examination of Sukkot, the Mishnah goes out of its way 
to preserve the memory that “Our forebears turned toward the East, to the 
Sun. . .” and the torches of Sukkot, juggled by the Levites as they danced 
through Jerusalem, may have been reminders of the sun. 
If we see Hanukkah as intentionally, not accidentally, placed at the 
moment of the darkest sun and darkest moon, ect of the candles 
seems to be an assertion of our hope for renewéd light. Just as at Sukkot we 
poured the water in order to remind God to pour out rain, perhaps one reason 
for us to light the candles is to remind God to renew the sun and moon. 
Indeed, the miracle of eight days’ light from one day’s oil sounds like an echo 
of the Mishnah’s comment that at the Sukkot water pouring, one log (mea- 
sure) of water was enough for eight days’ pouring. 
Through almost two millennia, Hanukkah remained a real but secon- 
dary festival of the Jewish people. Beginning late in the nineteenth century 
in central and eastern Europe, Hanukkah had a second birth. There were tw 
major factors in this second birth, both of them stemming from the eman- 
cipation of the Jewish people and their increasing day-to-day contact with 
the Christian and secular world. One of these factors was that as secular, 
non-religious, or rational religious ideas grew during the Haskalah or Jewish 
Enlightenment in the nineteenth century, there was a special disdain for the 
notion of such a miracle as the eight days’ light from one day’s oil in the 
Temple. Secular notions of Jewish peoplehood—including the Zionist notion 
of the Jews as a nation needing political rehabilitation through politico- 
military action—became more and more powerful. In that atmosphere, the 
Maccabees began to seem less dangerous and more heroic than they had 
throughout the centuries of rabbinic tradition. Indeed, many Zionists identi- 
fied the rabbis’ fear of militant action against oppressive governments as a 
major element of exile mentality to be transcended in rebuilding the Jewish 
people. 
Thus the miracle of the lights declined and the Maccabees advanced in 
attention and popularity from about 1890 on. Hanukkah became more and 
more important as a celebration of Jewish political courage and military 
prowess. Meanwhile, the Christian Apocryphal books of the Maccabees were 
becoming more accessible to Jews, as the barriers between the Jewish and 
Christian worlds crumbled. 
And meanwhile also, among Christians in Europe and North America 
the celebration of Christmas was becoming more and more a major society- 
wide event. Jews who were becoming semi-assimilated to the broader (Chris- 
tian) society felt themselves both attracted and threatened by the joyful and 
pleasant Christmas celebrations and especially by their attractiveness to 
children. Looking for some answer to this assimilating tug, many Jews found 


94 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Hanukkah—both because of its date and because of its anti-assimilationist 
content—a useful tool for strengthening Jewish identity. 
Out of these twin facts, Hanukkah was reborn with much more emphasis 
on the Maccabees, on resistance to assimilation and the defense of religious 
and ethnic pluralism, on the giving of gifts, and on the pleasure of children. 
e ancient ironies of assimilation and pluralism that had characterized 
Hanukkah from the beginning acted themselves out again, as, in an attempt 
to differentiate themselves from the peoples around them, the Jews made 
Hanukkah more like the holidays of those very peoples. 
@9>> PRESENT PRACTICE €ee 
The most striking ceremony of Hanukkah is the lighting of the candles. 
In Talmudic times there was a debate between the school of Shammai and 
the school of Hillel. Shammai urged that eight lights be lit on the first night 
and the number be reduced by one each night. Hillel urged that one candle 
be lit the first night and the number be increased by one each night. The 
tradition, as it did on almost every issue, decided that Jewish practice during 
normal history should follow that of the school of Hillel—reserving the more 
austere approach of Shammai to be put in practice only when Messiah comes. 
The reasons the Talmud gives for their disagreement are instructive. 
First it gives the obvious reason: Shammai thought the candles should 
represent the number of days of Hanukkah still to come, Hillel that it should 
represent the days already fulfilled. But then, unsatisfied, the Talmud sug- 
gests that Shammai had in mind the fact that on Sukkot, while the Temple 
stood there was a sacrifice of bulls in which the number of animals killed was 
reduced by one on each of the seven days of the festival. Perhaps Shammai 
had in mind that Hanukkah was originally a substitute Sukkot. In any case, 
the Talmud explains that Hillel argued we should increase holiness rather 
than diminish it. A modern sensibility, taking into account the sense of 
Hanukkah as the turning point from darkness to light, might speculate that 
during normal history—the realm of Hillel—the normal human fear of 
darkness would be best soothed by increasing light; but that after Messiah 
comes—when our practice will follow Shammai—human beings will be able 
to honor and celebrate the Divine Mystery that resides in darkness. 
The candles are lit each night—at least one set to a household, and in 
many communities one set to a person. The candelabra are traditionally 
required to have the eight nightly lights in a row, with none higher than the others. Sin are not to ed to do any work like lighting each 
other or casting light on a book, the custom arose of having a shammas or shamash, a ninth light separated from the others that is used to light them. renaneiidibltasbrl ie aad SAS tte MSO i 


HANUKKAH + 95 
Thus if anyone reads by the light of the candles, it is the shammas he or she is 
reading by. 
The lamp is placed at an outside window or hung from the left-hand 
doorpost (as one enters), across from the mezuzah—in order to publicize the 
miracle of the Temple lights. The rabbis added, however, that at any time 
and place where there was danger of attack from non-Jews, the lamp could be 
placed on a table in the room. The candles should be large enough to burn for 
half an hour, and should be lit as soon as possible after the stars come out 
each evening. 
On the first night of Hanukkah one candle is placed in the holder on 
one’s far right, the shammas is lit, and three blessings are said before the 
shammas is used to light the candle: 
Baruch atah adonai eloheynu melech ha-olam, 
asher kid’shanu b’mitzvotav vitzivanu l’hadlik ner 
shel Hanukkah. 
Blessed be You, Lord our God, King of all space-time, Who makes us 
holy through his commandments and commands us to light candles for 
Hanukkah. 
Baruch atah adonai eloheynu melech ha-olam 
sheh-asah nissim |’avoteynu ba-yamim ha-heym 
bazman hazeh. 
Blessed be You . . . Who worked miracles for our forebears in those 
days at this very season. 
Baruch atah adonai eloheynu melech 
ha-olam sheh-hechianu v’ki’manu v’higianu lazman hazeh. 
Blessed be You. . . Who has given us life, lifted us up, and brought us 
to this season. 
Then the candle is lit and several songs sung afterwards. One of these 
is— 
We kindle these lights on account of the miracles, the wonders, the 
liberations, and the battles that You carried out for our forebears in 
these days at this time of year, through the hands of Your holy priests. 
For all eight days of Hanukkah these lights are holy. We are not 
allowed to use them; they are only to look at, in order to thank and 
praise Your great Name on account of Your miracles, Your wonders, and 
Your liberations. 


96 +» SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Among the Ashkenazic communities descended from central and east- 
ern Europe, the household then sings “Ma-oz Tzur, Mighty Rock.” Sephardic 
Jews descended from Spanish and Mediterranean communities chant Psalm 
30: “You are my rock and fortress.” 
Ma-oz tzoor y’shoo-aw-ti |’cha na-eh |’shah- 
bayach; tikon beit t’filati, v’sham todah n’zabayach; 
L’ayt taw-cheen matbayach mitzawr ha-m’nah-bay-ach, 
Oz eg-mor b’shir mizmor, chanukat hamizbayach. 
And in English translation for the same tune: 
Rock of Ages, let our song 
Praise Your saving power; 
You, amid the raging foe, 
Were our shelt’ring tower. 
Furious they assailed us, 
But Your arm availed us, 
And Your word 
Broke their sword 
When our own strength failed us. 
Children of the martyr race, 
Whether free or fettered, 
Wake the echoes of the songs 
Where you may be scattered. 
Yours the message cheering 
That the time is nearing 
Which will see 
All peoples free, 
Tyrants disappearing. 
On every night after the first, one more candle is added, beginning on 
the right-hand side of the lamp (facing it) and marching one candle at a time 
toward the left. The first candle lit each night, however, is the new one 
representing the new day—that is, the candle furthest to the left—and thus 
the candles are lit in sequence from left to right. The blessings are said after 
the shammas is lit and before the nightly candles are. After the first night, 
only the beginning two blessings are recited; Sheh-hechianu, “Who has kept us 
alive until this season,” is not, because the season is no longer brand-new. 
We have already lived to see it. 


HANUKKAH - 97 
The tradition goes out of its way to say that since women especially 
suffered from the se i ’ viceroys, the oblj- 
gated to light the Hanukkah candles. This was both an important and 
Tuling, because in much of Jewish tradition until the present century 
(and in Orthodox circles still) women have been exempted from the obliga- 
tion to do certain acts at a certain time. The intention may have been to 
telease women to deal with the never-ending, ever-present demands of 
growing children; the effect was often to isolate them into childrearing and to 
prevent them from having the honor of fulfilling the time-bound command- 
ments on behalf of the community, as men could do. 
The custom grew up that neither men nor women work during the time 
the candles take to burn each night, and in some Sephardic communities 
women do not work at all on the first and eighth days of Hanukkah—or even 
on all eight. 
In the regular rhythm of daily prayer, there are two major changes for 
Hanukkah: the recitation of Hallel, the psalms of praise from Psalm 113 to 
118, every morning of the eight days; and the insertion of a special paragraph 
called Al Hanissim into the standing prayer, the amidah: 
On account of the miracles and the deliverance, the triumphs and 
liberations and battles that you accomplished for our forebears in these 
days at this season—It was in the days of Mattathias, son of Yokhanan, 
the Hasmonean high priest, and his sons that there arose the evil 
Hellenistic empire to rule over Your people Israel, to force them to 
forget Your Torah and to violate the rulings that You willed. But You in 
Your great motherly compassion stood up to side with them and plead 
their case in their time of trouble. You delivered the mighty into the 
hand of the weak, the many into the hand of the few, those soaked in 
death into the hand of the pure, the wicked into the hand of the 
righteous, the arrogant into the hand of those who pore over Your 
Torah. For Yourself You made a great and holy Name in all the worlds, 
and for Your people Israel You made a great and liberating deliverance, 
till this very day. And after all that, Your children came to the shrine of 
Your house to cleanse Your Temple and purify Your holy place, to 
kindle lights in Your holy courtyards and to establish these eight days of 
Hanukkah so as to thank and praise Your great Name. 
TORAH READINGS 
For all eight days of Hanukkah, as on the festivals of Pesach and Sukkot, 
the Torah is read every day. The reading is based on an analogy between 
the dedication of the original Shrine and the rededication of the Temple. It 


98 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
is taken from the passage from Numbers 7-8 that describes the offerings 
brought by the chief of every tribe when the traveling shrine was dedicated 
in the wilderness. On the first day, Numbers 7:1 through the offering of the 
first day’s tribe is read; on the second day, the second day’s offering; and so 
on to the seventh day. On the eighth day, everything from the eighth day 
to the twelfth is read, plus the verses on lighting the Menorah (8:1—4) that 
end, “In accord with the appearance that the Lord had made apparent to 
Moses, in that way he made the Menorah.” 
On the first Shabbos of Hanukkah, the regular Torah reading in the 
yearly cycle is read, plus the appropriate passage from Numbers for that day of 
Hanukkah. The Prophetic haftarah is from Zechariah II:14-IV:7. It describes a 
mystical vision about the dedication of the Second Temple in Jerusalem, after 
the Babylonian Exile. Zechariah envisions an angel showing him the Meno- 
rah, but when he asks “What are these?” the angel answers, “Not by might and 
not by power, but by My spirit, says the Lord of hosts.” So the Rabbis’ choice 
for a Hanukkah haftarah not only calls to mind the miracle of light but warns 
those who might be tempted to identify the day with the might and power of 
the Maccabees: it is My spirit that has rededicated you and My holy places. 
If Hanukkah begins on Shabbos and so has a second Shabbos on the 
eighth day, the haftarah is I Kings 7:40--50, describing the great brassworker 
Hiram’s work on the holy bowls and ornaments of the First Temple, and King 
Solomon’s provision of golden tools and menorahs for the golden altar. 
HANUKKAH CUSTOMS 
The Hebrew root of the word Hanukkah means education as well as 
dedication, and many Jewish communities have publicly addressed issues of 
Jewish education at Hanukkah time. Educational conferences have been held 
then, and some commentators trace the custom of giving children small 
amounts of money—Hanukkah gelt—to an effort to sweeten the process of 
Torah study. 
On the other hand, the more frivolous custom of gambling with cards or 
dreidls also became identified with Hanukkah. (Gambling was forbidden 
throughout the year on the ground that transferring wealth without doing work 
for it must be robbery. But on Hanukkah, the rabbis relaxed—and the people 
usually gambled for nuts rather than money.) The dreidl or s’vivon (Yiddish and 
Hebrew, respectively, for spinning top) became the favorite game. On each 
face of the dreidl was imprinted a Hebrew letter: nun, gimmel, hay, and sh’in. In 
Hebrew they were said to stand for “Nes gadol ha-ya sham—A great miracle 
happened there.” (In Israel the s'vivon is likely to have a pay for po—A great 
miracle happened here.) In Yiddish, however, the letters stood for nits, 
nothing; ganz, everything; halb, half; and shtell-arein, Put some in. 


HANUKKAH + 99 
The rules of dreidl are flexible, but usually operate this way. All the players 
put some equal number of nuts in the pot. They take turns spinning the dreidl. 
If it comes up “nothing,” nothing happens; if “half,” the spinner gets half the 
pot; if “put some in,” he puts in an agreed number of his own nuts; if 
“everything,” the spinner gets everything in the pot and everyone puts in the 
starter amount again. Whoever is bankrupted drops out; the last survivor, of 
course, wins. The game is remarkably simple-minded—and if played with a 
spirit of childish earnestness, remarkably funny. 
The ancient tradition of giving Hanukkah gelt to reward Torah study and 
the recent one of matching Christmas gifts have combined to encourage the 
giving of small gifts each night of Hanukkah. Some of these might be purely 
pleasurable in a secular way, others Jewish books or ceremonial art; some can 
be bought, others made by hand. In Israel, the custom has arisen of running a 
torchlight marathon during Hanukkah from Modin, the town where Mat- 
tathias first struck against Hellenistic idolatry, to Jerusalem. 
The Hanukkah traditions have given rise to some customs concerning 
food. The Apocryphal story of Judith, who killed the invading general 
Holofernes, became a channel for the very Jewish approach of taking an idea 
and giving it physical reality in the form of food—so that eating the food would 
then recall the idea. The Book of Judith is written about the Assyrian invasion, 
but in Maccabean times and since, the story has been connected to the 
resistance against Antiochus. In the legend that emerged, a Jewish woman 
inveigled the tyrant general to eat a lot of thirst-provoking cheese. Then she 
gave him a great deal of wine to slake his thirst. When he fell into a drunken 
sleep, she cut his head off—and frightened his army into rout. Out of all this 
tale-telling arose the custom of making special cheese dishes for Hanukkah. 
And as a way to honor the oil of the Temple miracle, the custom also 
arose to make some fried delicacies. In Eastern Europe, this came to mean 
latkes or pancakes; in Israel, sufganiyot or fried doughnuts. 
And in celebration of both the heroism that lights up Hanukkah and the 
frolicking that keeps it warm, some modern songs have become deep favorites: 
Mi yimalel gvurot Yisrael 
Oran mi yimneh? 
Heyn b’chol dor yakum hagibor go-el ha-am. (2) 
Sh’ma! Ba-yamim haheym bazman hazeh! 
Makabi moshia oofodeh 
Oov’yamenu kol am Yisrael 
Yitacheyed yakum |’higa-el 
Who can retell 
The things that befell us? 


100 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Who can count them? 
In every age, 
A hero or sage, 
Arose to our aid! 
Hark! In days of yore, in Israel’s ancient land, 
Brave Maccabeeus led the faithful band. 
But now all Israel must as one arise, 
Redeem itself through deed and sacrifice. 
#33) NEW APPROACHES ¢€ee® 
As we have seen, the Rabbinic tradition was hostile to the Maccabees; 
and modern Zionism, identifying with the Maccabees, was often hostile to the 
Rabbis. Thus Hanukkah has been a kind of battlefield between “the Rabbi” 
and “the Maccabee” as models of Jewish life. Is there any way to integrate these 
conflicting orientations to Hanukkah? 
From the standpoint of the Rabbi, Hanukkah celebrated God’s saving 
Spirit: “not by might and not by power . . .” To the Rabbi, this spiritual 
enlightenment required a kind of inwardness and contemplation that was 
contradictory to insurgent politics. 
From the standpoint of the Maccabee, Hanukkah celebrated human 
courage and doggedness, the human ability to make history bend and change. 
The need to organize, to act, to fight, to build might and use power, seemed in 
the aspect of the Maccabee to contradict study, prayer, and contemplation. 
Can a new generation of Jews help to resolve this contradiction? If our 
forebears repressed and ignored the sense of Hanukkah as a festival of the 
darkened moon and darkened sun, what could we contribute by opening up to 
that aspect of the festival? What could we add by seeing Hanukkah as part of 
the nature cycles of the year and month? 
Seen this way, Hanukkah is the moment when light is born from dark- ness, hope from despair. Both the Maccabeean and Rabbinic models fall into 
place. The Maccabean revolt came at the darkest moment of Jewish history— 
when not only was a foreign king imposing idolatry, but large members of Jews were choosing to obey. The miracle at the Temple came at a moment of 
spiritual darkness—when even military victory had proven useless because the 
Temple could not be rededicated in the absence of the sacred oil. At the moment of utter darkness in Modin, Mattathias struck the spark of rebellion— and fanned it into flame. At the moment of utter darkness at the Temple, when it would have been rational to wait for more oil to be pressed and consecrated, the Jews ignored all reasonable reasons, and lit the little oil they had. 


HANUKKAH + ](] 
The real conflict is not between the Rabbi and the Maccabee, between 
spiritual and political, but between apathy and hope, between a blind sur- 
tendering to darkness and an acting to light up new pathways. Sometimes the 
arena will be in outward action, sometimes in inward meditation. But always 
the question is whether to recognize the darkness—and transcend it. 
The necessity of recognizing the moment of darkness is what we learn 
from seeing Hanukkah in its context of the sun and moon. There is no use 
pretending that the sun is always bright; there is no use pretending that the 
moon is always full. It is only by recognizing the season of darkness that we 
know it is time to light the candles, to sow a seed of light that can sprout and 
spring forth later in the year. 
Seen this way, Hanukkah can become a time for accepting both the 
Maccabee and the Rabbi within us, seeing them as different expressions of the 
need to experience despair and turn toward hope. Seen this way, Hanukkah 
can become a resource to help us experience our moments of darkness whenev- 
er they occur throughout the year—and strike new sparks. 
@>) FOODS’ <cee 
POTATO LATKES 
(POTATO PANCAKES) 
6 medium-sized potatoes 3 tablespoons flour, matzo 
1 small onion meal, or bread crumbs 
1 teaspoon salt Y, teaspoon baking powder 
1 egg 
Wash, pare, and grate raw potatoes. Strain but not too dry and use juice for 
soup or sauce. If juice is retained, a little more flour will be needed for 
thickening. Grate and add the onion; add salt and the egg. Beat well. Mix 
remaining ingredients and beat into potatoes; mix well. Drop by spoonfuls into 
hot fat that is deep enough to almost cover the cake. Brown on both sides. 
Drain on absorbent paper. Serve with applesauce, if desired. Serves 4 or 5. Best 
if eaten immediately, but may be kept warm in the oven. 
>> «eco 
*Recipes by Hannah Waskow and Rose Gertz. 


102 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
POTATO PUDDING 
5 large potatoes VY, teaspoon pepper 
1 medium-sized onion 1 egg, beaten 
| teaspoon baking powder 2 tablespoons chicken fat 
1 teaspoon salt (or vegetable fat) 
Wash, pare, and grate fine the potatoes and onion. Sift the dry ingredients 
together, and add with the egg and fat. Mix and pour into a greased 2 quart 
baking dish, dot with additional fat. Bake in a moderately hot oven (375° F.) 
for 1% hours—until top is crusty brown. Serves 6. 
SWEET AND SOUR STUFFED ROLLED CABBAGE 
8 TO 10 ROLLS 
CABBAGE 
1 head of loosely rolled large leaf cabbage. 
Sever each leaf at the core and remove carefully trying to keep from 
tearing. One large leaf for each portion or 2 small leaves to used as one. 
Small central leaves to be sliced as for slaw and used as bed for rolls. 
Boil water in large pot sufficient to cover number of leaves to be rolled. 
Put leaves into boiling water and allow to boil 4 to 5 minutes so they 
become pliable. Remove carefully and boil next batch. Depending on size 
of pot, handle 3 or 4 leaves at a time. 
MEAT 
Prepare ground meat as usual (1 lb.). Add Ys to %2 cup of cooked rice. Fill 
leaves handling the same as for blintzes. 
COOKING 
Slice 1 onion and add to sliced cabbage. Put into shallow pan such as 
covered frying pan, cover with water and bring to boil. Make up bag of 
spices (1 tbsp. mixed pickling spice tied securely in cheesecloth or white 
cloth) and put in pot. Lay stuffed cabbage rolls in single layer if possible. If 
not, double layer may be used with care taken on removal. 
Cook for ¥% hour. Add 1 can tomato paste, shake of ketchup, 2 tbsp. 
sugar, 3 pcs. sour salt, ¥2 tsp. salt, dash of pepper. 
Cook for 10 minutes. Adjust to taste. More sugar if you like it sweeter, 
more sour salt if you like it tarter. You may needa little more salt. Break 4 ginger snaps into liquid. Make sure there is enough liquid as this mixture tends to thicken and may stick. If more liquid is needed during cooking 
use hot or boiling water. If gravy not thick enough add more ginger snaps. 
Pot should have tight lid. 
Continue cooking 2 hour. Any left-overs may be frozen. 


HANUKKAH - ](3 
@» GO AND STUDY «ee 
See David Rosenberg, A Blazing Fountain (Schocken), an excellent 
collection of poetic translations and renderings of readings for Hanukkah; and 
Elias Bickerman, The Maccabees (Schocken) for an unsentimental, readable, 
brief, and pointed history of the Maccabean rebellion and civil war. 
For an interesting effort to draw together a grown-up Hanukkah that 
focuses on peace and on integrating Jewish and American texts, see Yaakov 
Bar Nachman, The Hanukkah Haggadah (Barah Books, Box 697, San An- 
selmo, CA 94960). 


HINEI MATOV 
“Behold how good and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity. . .”’ (Psalm 133) The olive (i.e. children of Israel) stands at the foot of Mt. Sinai; the wolf and lamb dwell together under the fig and the grape. Each of these trees provides fruit for the Tu B’Shvat meal. 


fe>5 CHAPTER SEVEN feeog 
THE TREE THAT 
SUSTAINS ALL LIFE 
—TU B’SHVAT 
Bs winter, still winter, but the days are visibly longer. The sun is 
visibly brighter. In the Land of Israel, it is still raining—but the rains are 
beginning to slacken. Already they have filled the deepest recesses of the 
earth. 
Far underground, the roots of trees are beginning to suck at earth’s 
replenished breasts. Their branches are beginning to grope toward the gather- 
ing light. There is barely any change to see; there is barely any change to hear. 
But the turn of the year has come. The still and quiet months are over; the seed 
is quickening, life is reasserting itself. In this hushed moment we celebrate the 
new year of the trees, and the reawakening of the Tree of Life. 
@3>> ORIGINS ceem 
When the Temple still stood, one tenth of the income of Israelite farmers 
and shepherds was taxed—tithed—for the support of the priesthood, of the 
Levitical religio-legal functionaries, and of the poor. After the Temple was 
destroyed, the tithing system continued in the Land of Israel and for many 
Diaspora Jews. The income from the contributions went to those priests and 
Levites who were also Torah scholars—and finally to students of Torah 
whether they were priests and Levites or not. 
The tithing system included a one-tenth tax on fruit. The tithe of fruit 
could only be given on behalf of the fruit crop of a given year out of the fruit 
* 105 - 


106 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
that actually ripened in that year. So in order to organize the tithe correctly 
there had to be a tax year—an agreed date by which to define the end of the 
fruit crop of the previous year, and the beginning of the fruit crop of the next 
year. 
By the time the Mishnah was codified (in the second century), there was 
a mild disagreement between the two great schools of rabbinic thought— 
those of Shammai and Hillel—on when the new year in regard to fruit comes. 
Should it be on the first or the fifteenth day of the month of Sh’vat? (Sh’vat 
is the eleventh month of the year, counting from the spring month of Nisan. ) 
The view of the House of Hillel was adopted—as it almost always was. 
Why was the late winter month considered the time to end and to begin 
the year of the fruit crop? Because, the Gemara explains, even though most of 
winter is still to come, most of the rain has already fallen—so the trees begin 
to drink from it, and their sap begins to rise. 
Why did Hillel support and the rabbis choose the fifteenth, rather than 
the first, of Sh’vat; that is, the full moon, rather than the new moon? We 
know that the decisions of the House of Hillel tended to be more lenient and 
flexible, more in accord with the needs of the common folk, than the more 
austere decisions of Shammai. The full moon of Sh’vat, with its resplendent 
night of light, may have been a more practical and pleasant time for celebra- 
tion than the barely glimmering new moon. And this particular full moon 
was exactly six months from the summery full moon of Av—celebrated with 
dances and betrothals. So the one may have been something of a midsummer 
day and the other a midwinter day. Hillel may have been choosing to identify 
the turning time of the fruit crop with a midwinter full-moon festival that was 
already popular—rather than add yet another festive day at a time nearby. 
For hundreds of years, this midwinter fiscal new year for fruit trees was 
viewed as a minor holiday. Fasting and the saying of penitential prayers were 
prohibited. But the Hallel psalms of praise were not said as they were on the 
grand festivals, and the Talmud has even less to say about the day than it does 
about the midsummer fifteenth of Av. 
Yet the minor festival hung on in gentle celebration. In the Ashkenazic 
communities of central and eastern Europe, the custom arose of singing Psalm 
104 and the fifteen Psalms of Ascent (Psalms 120-134) which may have been 
sung by the Levites as they ascended fifteen steps into the inner court of the 
Israelites at the Temple. Along with these fifteen psalms went eating fifteen 
different kinds of fruit—especially some from the Land of Israel. A special 
association arose with carob or (in Yiddish) bokser—a tree mentioned as the 
chief food of the mystical rabbi Shimon bar Yochai during the years he hid 
from the Roman soldiery in a cave. In addition to carob, the fruits specially favored were olives, dates, grapes, figs, and pomegranates—all mentioned in 
the Torah specially as part of the goodness of the Land of Israel. The fifteen | Siver and the fifteen fruits may be seen as simply celebrating the fifteenth of Sh'vat. 


TU B'SHVAT - 107 
But they may have a deeper significance as well. Psalm 104 is a magnifi- 
cent hymn to the Creator about the wonders of Creation. It celebrates the 
waters that God once allowed to flood the earth, but which now are con- 
strained within the boundaries God sets—and come only as the rain that all 
life needs. 
The trees of the Lord have their fill; 
The cedars of Lebanon, which He planted, 
Wherein the birds make their nests; 
As for the stork, the fir trees are her house. 
The feeling that Tu B’Shvat is in some more than legal sense a new year, 
the moment of ascent from the depths of winter into new life, may have kept 
its celebration alive when the tithing of fruits had long since been aban- 
doned. 
In the last 500 years, Tu B’Shvat has taken on more significance. From 
the community of mystics in the town of Safed above the Galilee in the 
sixteenth century, there emerged a new set of practices for Tu B’Shvat. The 
mystics of Safed got interested because one of the Kabbalists’ images of 
the S’phirot or emanations of God is of a Tree. 
The S’phirot represent the dynamic aspects of God through which the 
creation of the world continually takes place—aspects that begin in the 
unimaginable, undiscussable Eyn Sof—the Endless One—and become pro- 
gressively more in touch with the created world and with human understand- 
ing. They are thus sometimes imagined as a Tree whose roots (above) are 
invisible and inexplicable to us and whose trunk and branches reach (down) 
toward us. Through this Tree there courses the ultimate flow of universal life, 
and its flow is what gives life to the whole palpable universe. The image is 
connected with the reference in the story of the Garden of Eden to a Tree of 
Life in the center of the Garden which is its ultimate treasure. 
Since the Talmud refers to the fifteenth of Sh’vat as “the New Year of 
the tree,” this can be taken as a New Year of The Tree. That is, the fifteenth 
of Sh’vat can be taken as the date on which the Tree of Life, the Tree of the 
S’phirot, renews the flow of life to the universe. The mystics of course viewed 
this as an awesome moment, to be guarded and mothered by those adepts 
who understood the process. It is as if this day were God’s own Rosh 
Hashanah. Just as we need God's presence on our Rosh Hashanah to help us 
renew our days, so God, as it were, needs our presence on this one. 
The mystics felt that this human intervention should take the form of 
eating fruit—the literal fruit that is the final product of the older generation 
of the earthly tree, which bears within it the seed of the next generation. The 
fruit is thus the symbol of the awesome moment in which the flow of life is 
renewed; and if human beings eat it in a holy way, with the proper blessing 
and directed intention, the flow is maintained and encouraged. 


108 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Out of this speculation among the Kabbalists of Safed came a practice, 
which was at first an oral tradition concerning a Seder for the night of the 
fifteenth of Av, in which the celebrants would eat a number of sets or courses 
of different kinds of fruit. In one version, there were three courses, made up 
of fruit with no shells, either outside or in, so that the entire fruit could be 
eaten (such as figs, grapes, carob, apples); fruit with an inedible internal pit 
(such as dates, olives, plums); and fruit with a tough outer shell (pomegran- 
ates, coconuts). These three kinds of fruit represented three of the four levels 
of the process of creation: assiyah or action, the physical world around us; 
yeturah or formation, the level analogous to Plato’s forms in which the ideal 
version of our world is set; beriah or creation, in which the inner dynamic 
processes that result in the forms are set in motion; and atzilut or emanation, 
in which God-energy infuses the processes with their initial life. Atzilut is so 
soft as to be utterly ethereal, beyond representation by the fruit; beriah is 
palpable but so soft that it needs no protection and is represented by fruit 
without shells; yetzirah needs protection, but only at its heart, and so is 
represented by fruit with an inedible pit; and assiyah, in the real world, needs 
full protection—and so is represented by fruit with tough shells on the 
outside. Within each set of fruit in this version of the Tu B’Shvat Seder, 
there are ten different species of fruit to be eaten—representative of the ten 
S’phirot. 
Saying blessings over these fruits would help to release the holy sparks of 
life-flow in them. Moreover, actually chewing the fruit would have an even 
more profound effect—since we have 32 teeth, and the word Elohim, God, 
appears 32 times in the story of creation. Instead of hoarding the holy sparks 
on earth, the person who joined in the Seder would be returning them to the 
Creator, to the Tree of Life—to keep the life-flow going. 
The Kabbalists’ Seder for the fifteenth of Sh’vat also included the drinking of four cups of wine, beginning with a cup of white wine; then a cup 
of mild pink made by mixing some red wine into the white; a cup of deep 
rose; and a cup of red with just a drop of white in it. These four may have 
represented the shift in the yearly seasons from the paleness of winter through 
the awakening spring into blooming summer and the riotous color of fall. Or 
they may have represented the four letters of the most holy Name of God. 
The Seder also included readings from a range of Jewish literature on trees and fruit. 
A slightly different version of the Tu B’Shvat Seder as it came from the 
Kabbalists of Safed ran this way: 
At sunset people would gather at the Bet Midrash or at the home of one of the sages or honored members of the community. Candles were lit, the tables covered with white cloths and decorated with myrtle branches, flowers, and greenery, scented with rose water, and set with pitchers of two varieties of wine—white and red. The white symbolizes 


TU B’SHVAT + 109 
the dormancy and barren look of the plant world which began with the 
weakening of the sun’s rays (near the summer solstice) on the fifteenth 
of Av. The red is a sign of the awakening of the plant to the flowering 
and growth which comes as the sun’s strength begins to retu¢n—on Tu 
B’Shvat The forces of nature—cold and heat, winter and summer— 
struggle as one kingdom grapples with the other until the red triumphs 
and the kingdom of spring descends upon the world. 
After reading thirteen biblical passages about the produce of the 
land, fruits, and plants, and studying excerpts from the Talmud (usually 
tractate Seeds, Zeraim) and the great 13th-century mystical text, the 
Zohar, the head of the assembly closes with this special prayer: “May it 
be Your will,.O Lord our God and God of our forebears, that by virtue 
of the eating of the fruits of the trees, which we shall now eat and bless, 
they may be filled with the strength of the abundance of Your glory to 
grow and to flourish from the beginning to the end of the year, .for 
goodness and for blessing, for good life and for peace.” 
Then the first of the four cups is poured—entirely white wine. 
They serve wheat (in the form of tasty cakes), olives, dates, and grapes. 
One of the company makes the blessing over each fruit in the name of 
the entire group, making certain that the one who is blessing does not 
taste before he blesses from another fruit. Before they enjoy the fruit, 
each one reads over an appropriate selection from the Talmud or the 
Zohar. After eating the fruits they ali bless the wine and they drink with 
great shouts of joy. Meanwhile the second of the four cups of wine is 
poured, mostly white with a trace of red. They bring the assembly figs, 
pomegranates, etrogs, and apples. After another reading from the 
Zohar, and the blessings as above, they drink the second cup with a 
great spirit of rejoicing. The third cup is poured, half white and half 
red. 
Nuts (almonds or chestnuts), carobs, and pears are served. The 
company reads over a selection from the Talmud Berakhot and con- 
cludes with the study of Mishnah Kelaim. After discussing this selection, 
they raise their cups and drink to a year of goodness and blessing, 
fruitfulness and increase. Then they mix the fourth cup, red with a 
touch of white, and bring to the table a great variety of fruit: sorb 
apples, quince, cherries, crab apples, pistachios, sour cherries, and 
loquats. And just as they began with wheat, a grain, so did they finish 
the banquet with various seeds and peas, and drink the fourth cup with 
singing. Then the people get up from the tables and go out to dance 
(Sefer Hamoadim, Y.T. Levinsky, editor). 
The new form of celebration made its way from Safed into the broader 
Jewish world first by oral tradition and then by its inclusion in a compendium 
of practices for holy days called Chemdat Yamim, published in the 17th 


110 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
century. Early on this handbook got the reputation of having been written by 
adherents of the false Messiah Shabbatai Tzvi, and so it was shunned by many 
main-line Jewish thinkers. But several of the specific chapters about specific 
festivals were so useful and attractive that they were published separately. 
Among these was the passage on the Seder of the fifteenth of Sh’vat, called 
Pri Eytz Hadar—Fruit of the Lovely Tree—published in 1753. Pri Eytz Hadar 
brought about wider use of the Seder, especially among Sephardic Jews and 
among the Chassidim in Europe. 
The Festival of Trees took on another aspect late in the nineteenth 
century. The growing Jewish settlements in Palestine were discovering that 
planting trees was a crucial act of restoration of the land—bringing with it a 
new ecological web of seeds and ground water, insects and small animals that 
made possible the sowing of crops. Planting trees became both the practical 
means and the symbolic representation of planting Jewish communities. 
Perhaps in part influenced by the Arbor Day that was then current in 
America and had been copied elsewhere in the world, the settlers began to 
have their children plant trees on the fifteenth of Sh’vat. In the Diaspora, 
under the auspices of the Jewish National Fund, the day become a day of 
focusing on collecting money to plant trees in the Land of Israel. 
@99> PRACTICE €ee> 
The name used for the fifteenth of Sh’vat is almost as flexible as is 
observance of the day. Since fifteen in Hebrew is Chamishah Asar, the 
holiday is sometimes known as “Chamishah Asar B’Shvat.” But more fre- 
quently it is called “Tu B’Shvar,” from the Hebrew numerals that spell 
fifteen. The Hebrew numeral system, like Roman numerals where the letter 
“V" can mean the number “5,” uses the letters of the alphabet for numbers. 
The way to say “13” is to use the letters for “10” and “3”; the way to say “14” 
is to use the letters for “10” and “4”; etc. But to say “15” raises a problem. 
The letter for 10 is yod and the letter for 5 is hay. So 15 would be yod-hay. But 
that is also one of the Names of God, and is half of the most sacred Name. So 
it is not used. Instead the numerals for 9 plus 6—that is, tet and vav—are put 
together. Pronounced like a word, they come out as “Tu” for 15. Other 
names are Chag Ha-Ilanot and Chag Ha-Perot, Festival of Trees and Festival of 
Fruits. 
Observance of Tu B’Shvat is fairly fluid, since no legal authorities have 
specified practice for the day. Recent observance has included a form of Tu B’Shvat Seder based on the one developed by the Kabbalists of Safed, in which the four cups of wine bracket the three sets of fruit. Each of the four cups is preceded by the blessing “Baruch atah Adonai eloheynu melech ha-olam borey p’ri hagafen. Blessed are You, Lord our God, ruler of space and 


TU BSHVAT : 1]]] 
time, who creates the fruit of the vine.” Each of the sets of fruit is preceded by 
the blessing. “Baruch atah Adonai eloheynu melech ha-olam borey p’ri 
ha-eytz. Blessed are You, Lord our God, Who creates the fruit of the tree.” 
For any fruit that the celebrant has not eaten during the previous year, the 
blessing Sheh-hechianu—Who kept us alive—is added. 
Songs, especially about trees, are often interspersed with the wine and 
fruit. So are readings about trees from the rabbinic commentaries, the 
Midrash (e.g., Midrash Rabbah on Leviticus, XXV, Soncino Engl. ed., pp. 
313-324) and the great thirteenth century mystical work, the Zohar (e.g., 
133a, 1158b—59a, III16a, 58a, 74a, 86a, 127a, 189b), from modern Yiddish 
and Hebrew poets like Saul Tchernichowsky, and from non-Jewish sources. 
Some time is often given for reflection and sharing of feelings about trees and 
about being soft, hard-centered, and hard-shelled. 
Some congregations have, either at the beginning or end of the Seder, 
planted trees in their own communities in addition to collecting money for 
trees in Israel. The physical act of planting the tree has carried a powerful 
emotional charge, as well as asserting a sense of Jewish connection with and 
caring for the surrounding community. 
@#>> NEW APPROACHES €€e® 
In the early 1970s the many-layered Jewish imagery of trees—Biblical, 
Kabbalistic, and Zionist—became especially important to a number of Jews 
who were seeking to work in an explicitly Jewish way toward ending the 
Vietnam War. Most were young, but they included the venerable teacher 
Abraham Joshua Heschel. To them it became a special concern that United 
States government policy took as one of its tasks the destruction of Viet- 
namese forests—and to them it felt especially striking that Torah requires 
that even if one decides to make war against a city, its trees must be protected 
(Deut. 20:19). 
Out of this focus on the tree they developed a Campaign for Trees and 
Life for Vietnam, which raised money for reforestation and reconstruction of 
devastated areas of Vietnam and which planted symbolic trees of peace in 
such places as the lawn of the U.S. Capitol. Often these plantings were done 
on Tu B’Shvat, and the day became (to a rather small number of people) a 
focus of caring and working for peace. 
From the same command of the Torah not to destroy trees in wartime, 
the rabbis deduced the general command of Bal Tash-chit (Do Not Destroy), 
an entire ethic of protecting the natural world and the product of human 
labors. If even the trees of our enemies must be preserved, they said, all the 
more the earth and air and water when there is no war! So out of their own 
expansion of the verse of Torah that protects trees into a pattern of protect- 


112 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
ing the environment, we might draw a general expansion of Tu B’Shvat into 
a day of celebration and reaffirmation of the necessity of protecting God’s 
world. 
Indeed, Tu B’Shvat comes at precisely the most precarious moment in 
the cycle of nature. The darkness of Hanukkah may look more frightening to 
human eyes, but the actual danger to non-human life is greater when the cold 
has set in deeper. So deep winter, when trees and other vegetation must 
struggle to begin again, may be a specially appropriate moment to commit 
ourselves to protect the environment and to renew the flow of nature’s life in 
our own generation, when it is most in danger. 
The ancient Jewish sensitivity to the tree as a symbol and metaphor of 
Torah (the Tree of Life) and God (the Tree of the S’phirot) is what stirred the 
“interest of the comparatively modern Kabbalists of Safed in Tu B’Shvat. We 
may extend their sensitivity by looking at the Most Holy Name of God as a 
calligraphic version of a tree in the cycle of its life: the Yod, a tiny seed; the 
Hay, a flowing, curving expanse of roots; the Vav, a tall trunk; the Hay, a 
flowing, curving expanse of branches. From the branches and their fruit 
comes the new seed, the new Yod. The tree, like the Yod-Hay-Vav-Hay, 
always begins anew; can always say, like the Yod-Hay-Vavu-Hay, “EHYEH 
ASHER EHYEH. | AM WHAT I AM BECOMING.” 
These two approaches to the tree of Tu B’Shvat—seeing in it both the 
trees of the worldwide garden of endangered life and the Tree of the life- 
source in the Yod-Hay-Vav-Hay—can fructify each other. If we make Tu B’Shvat a day of politics and history, a day of recommitment to our nurtur- 
ing, our gardening of the biosphere, we can help the Yod-Hay-Vav-Hay 
re-enter our lives. If we make Tu B’Shvat a day of meditation, contemplation 
of the Tree that sustains all life, we can renew ourselves . . . to sustain all life. 
#3) SONGS «eee 
Atzey zeytim ohmdim la-la-la-la-la 
Olive trees are standing. 
Hashkediya po-rachat v’shemesh paz zorachat 
Tzipporim marosh kol gan m’vashrot et-bo ha-chag 
Tu B’Shvat higia, chag ha-ilanot 
The almond tree is growing, 
A golden sun is glowing, 
The birds sing out in joyous glee 
From every roof and every tree. 
Tu B’Shvat is here— 
Hail the trees’ new year! 


TU B'SHVAT - ]]3 
@3> GO AND STUDY €e@® 
Since the publication of Seasons of Our Joy in 1982, Tu B’Shvat has 
indeed for many North American Jews become a “day of celebration and 
reaffirmation of the necessity of protecting God’s world.” This is probably 
the most important and far-reaching change in celebration of the Jewish 
festivals during the past decade. 
This development was stimulated by and helped to stimulate the writing 
of new Haggadot for the Tu B’Shvat Seder. These draw on the mystical 
tradition that flows from the sixteenth-century Kabbalists of S’fad, while 
simultaneously seeing the four mystical elements of earth, water, air, and 
fire as aspects of the wounded physical body of this planet. 
The first of these, by Devora Bartnoff and Mordechai Liebling, appeared 
in Menorah (January-February 1984). The Trees’ Birthday by Ellen Bernstein 
was published in 1988 and is now available from Shomrei Adamah (Church 
Rd. and Greenwood Ave., Wyncote, PA 19095). In 1989, Temple Beth Or 
and Shomrei Adamah of Miami (11715 S.W. 87th Ave., Miami, FL 33176) 
published Rami M. Shapiro’s First Plant: A Tu b’Shevat Haggadah; and the 
Central Conference of American Rabbis published Adam Fisher’s Seder Tu 
Bishevat: The Festival of Trees. 
Miles Krassen is translating the first English edition of Pri Eytz Hadar, 
the crucial text on the Kabbalistic Tu B’Shvat Seder. The first portion was 
published in New Menorah, Second Series (Spring 1990); the full text will 
be available from Shomrei Adamah. 


ESTHER Il 
“The king held out the golden sceptre towards Esther.” (Esther 8:4) The com- mentators teach us that the bramble (Haman) was uprooted by the wolf (Mordecai), with the bear (Ahashverosh) sitting by as the myrtle (Esther) 
spreads influence over all. 


fe} CHAPTER EIGHT J 
SPRING FEVER— 
PURIM 
1 is early in the spring. The brown and sober trees of winter have put 
on gleaming costumes of bright green—not the darker, sedate green of later 
spring, but a sparkling elfin green. People act a little crazy—shedding heavy 
clothes while there is still a chill in the air, laughing a little wildly when there 
is no reason. The tyrant winter is not quite overthrown, but he is smelling 
musty. 
Into this moment comes Purim, the Festival of Lotteries, the hilarious 
noisemaker among all the holy days, the day of merriment and buffoonery, 
parody and satire, the loony day of full moon in the pre-spring month of 
Adar. But the laughter of Purim is not a gentle laughter: it is a kind of angry, 
blood-red humor that celebrates the tyrant’s overthrow. 
For of course Purim recalls the tyrant Haman who would have murdered 
all the Jews—remembers that he cast lots with our lives, rermembers that his 
own stupidity and greed would not have been enough to save us without the 
courage and tenacity of Mordechai and Esther. So even as a festival of 
merriment, Purim has its bloodier, darker underside of fear and fury 
#» ORIGINS cee 
The origins of Purim are wrapped up in the Scroll of Esther—but it is not 
clear which way the wrapping goes: whether Esther led to Purim or Purim to 
Esther. For millennia, most Jews accepted the explanation of the text of 
at 


116 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Esther: Purim was invented as a celebration of the victory of the Jewish 
community in Persia, led by Queen Esther and her cousin Mordechai, over a 
plot to exterminate them all that had been worked out by Prime Minister 
Haman and approved by King Ahasuerus. 
In the past century, however, scholars have questioned whether the 
events described in the Book of Esther could have happened even approx- 
imately that way—given our historical and sociological knowledge about the 
Persian kingdom. They have suggested instead that the holiday came first; 
that the Book was written to explain and embellish it. They suggest that the 
Jews of Persia borrowed from their Persian hosts an early springtime feast of 
revelry and possibly of a mock battle between two sides. (Such springtime 
mock battles are found in many cultures—battles between winter and spring, 
between two political parties or great families, between two nations.) Such a 
celebration might then have gotten intertwined with the literary genre of a 
story about palace and harem intrigue, and with the memory of a struggle of 
the Jews against a hostile faction in the kingdom— intertwined in such a way 
as to produce the Scroll of Esther. 
Some scholars have even suggested that the Scroll of Esther was written 
long after the Persian period, and was a kind of historical novel intended to 
comment on the situation of the Jews under Hellenistic rule. Indeed, there is 
a tale of Jewish danger and salvation under the Hellenistic Prolemys of Egypt 
where the king’s Jewish sweetheart is said to have saved the Jews that sounds 
like the Esther story. 
In any case, the period of resistance to Hellenism was one in which 
Purim and another Jewish holiday struggled for mastery of Adar. The other 
holiday, Nicanor Day, was mentioned in Tractate Ta-anit, Fasts, of the 
Talmud. It celebrated the defeat of Antiochus’ general Nicanor by the 
Maccabees. It was held on the 13th of Adar—the day before Purim. It may be that the anti-Maccabean rabbis who disliked Hanukkah also disliked Nicanor 
Day, and encouraged celebration of Purim as an alternative way of both enjoying early spring and commemorating a Jewish triumph over disaster. In such a view, Purim would have been most useful to the rabbis precisely because it predated the Maccabees and because the Scroll of Esther ignored them. It is clear that Purim won, and was described in the Mishnah and Gemara with great relish and detail. Nicanor Day was barely mentioned, and fell out of use entirely during the Talmudic period. Indeed, once the Fast of Esther was established on the day before Purim, Nicanor Day was obliterated in principle as well as in fact—for on the festive Nicanor Day, fasting had been prohibited. 
The Scroll of Esther lends itself to the belief that it was written for an already hilarious Purim, because it seems so clearly a literary joke: a mobiliza- tion of hilarity and humor to cure the soul of fear and to shatter the pompous pretensions of all tyranny. The story is, indeed, the intertwining of two jokes. In one of them, Haman’s efforts to impale Mordechai, destroy the Jews, and 


PURIM + ]17 
elevate himself are rewarded with precise irony: Haman himself is impaled, 
his own party is massacred, and Mordechai and all the Jews are elevated to 
great power and honor. 
The other joke is very similar in structure, though sketched in ink less 
bloody: King Ahasuerus gets the whole story going by deposing Queen 
Vashti—so that he and all other husbands will never again have to take 
orders from their wives. He ends the tale by taking orders precisely from his 
wife—the new Queen Esther. As Haman’s murderous anti-Semitism carries 
him to his own death, so Ahasuerus’ contemptuous anti-feminism carries him 
to his own stultification. The joke is on the tyrant. 
The joke is both bloody and bawdy. Blood? More than a few Jews have 
paled, along with others, as they have read in Chapter IX of the Scroll that 
not only a few hundred anti-Semitic mobsters in the capital city but also 
75,000 in the provinces were killed by the aroused Jewish self-defense groups. 
But more than a few Jews have laughed at this fiction with a fierce and angry 
laughter: “Lift a hand against us, and you will be well repaid!” 
As for the bawdy joke, think of the sexual overtones of the story: Vashti 
ordered to display herself, the months of perfuming to prepare Esther for the 
King’s bed, the suspense as he reaches out his golden sceptre so that she can 
touch its end and save her life, the villain Haman collapsing in fear on the 
Queen’s own couch while Ahasuerus raves that Haman is threatening to rape 
her. 
God forbid that God should appear in such a story! And, of course, He 
doesn’t. In this tale God is never mentioned. Even when it would seem most 
urgent that Esther, Mordechai, and the Jews pray to the Lord of liberation, 
they do not. They fast, they cry out, they wear sack cloth, they imagine 
salvation from another place if Esther cannot gather her courage—but they 
never pray, never look to God for help. The only other book of the Bible in 
which God’s name appears not once is the Song of Songs. In the one case, 
the story is too bawdy. In the other, perhaps, it is too sublime—for God’s 
Presence may be most sublime when the Presence is so totally suffused 
throughout Creation that God as a separate Other with a Name, out there, 
becomes invisible amid the consciousness of God in here, unnamed. 
As H. L. Ginsberg, a modern scholar and translator of the Scroll, points 
out, Esther even ends with a joke on the halacha, that sacred life-path of 
Jewish law and lore. As an act of justice and equity, says the Scroll, the merry 
feast of Purim was instituted by the Sages to balance out the solemn fast-days 
they required in memory of destruction of the Temple. Fair is fair! If we must 
deviate from the original spiritual path of the year in order to fast and mourn, 
then we must also deviate to laugh too much and drink too much. 
Indeed, in accordance with the atmosphere of hilarity that had char- 
acterized Purim from the beginning, the Talmud urges Jews to become so 
mellow on that night that they can no longer distinguish between “blessed be 
Mordechai” and ‘cursed be Haman.” In Eastern Europe, this command to 


118 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
drunkenness was observed well enough that a proverb grew up to describe a 
foolish person: “He gets drunk all year and stays sober on Purim.” Within the 
Talmud’s call to levity there lurks yet another joke: using gematria, 
the mystical Jewish technique of counting the various Hebrew letters as the 
numbers they are used for in arithmetic, the letters in the words “Baruch 
Mordechai” and “Arur Haman” add up to the same number. So on a higher 
or a lower plane, the two profoundly different sentiments indeed become 
indistinguishable: a joke on feelings and reality. 
It is hardly a surprise that in early spring there should be such a festival 
of laughter and excess. In many cultures there is such a bawdy celebration of 
the spring, of which the Christian carnival is only one (carne vale, “farewell 
to meat” before the Lenten fasting). In medieval Europe, indeed, an already 
lively Purim was quick to enhance its own hilarity by borrowing the carnival 
masquerades and mystery plays. Jews costumed as Vashti and Moses, Solo- 
mon and Mordechai, would stroll the streets to sing and shout. More formal 
plays about the various dangers and deliverances of the Jews, such as the story 
of Goliath and David, were concocted and publicly presented in European 
Jewish communities. The Purimshpiel or Ahashverosh-shpiel—a burlesque of 
the Purim story itself—became a staple of the celebration, sometimes sexually 
obscene enough that the rabbis tried to stop them. The custom grew of 
making Purim-Torah—parodying the prayers themselves on Purim night, 
parodying the rabbis’ Talmudic debates and discussions over how to apply 
Torah to life-dilemmas. So Purim became a Jewish version of the widespread 
human custom of a season for relaxing the rules, even for making fun of the most serious parts of life. Nor was this alien to its beginnings. For if indeed 
the Book of Esther was a fictional tale explaining a spring revel, then the Scroll itself was in a sense the first Purimshpiel, the first act of Purim-Torah. 
@9>> MAKING READY <«€e® 
The Scroll of Esther mentions that help must be given to the poor on Purim—as if to remind us that no merriment is full of heart unless everyone in the community is able to take part in it. In carrying out this command of the Scroll, the community made the whole Purim season a period of tzeda- kah—the righteous act of helping those in trouble. 
The focus on tzedakah begins on the Shabbos just before Adar begins (or at latest on the first day of the new month, Rosh Chodesh, if that day itself falls on Shabbos). That Shabbos is set aside as Shabbos Shekalim, the day on which to the regular Torah portion is added the passage (Exodus 30:11-16) on the giving of shekels for support of the sacrificial offerings at the Holy Temple. (The Prophetic haftarah for the day is II Kings 11:17-12:17, in which King Jehoash collects funds for repairing the Temple. ) 


PURIM + ]19 
When the Temple stood, it was necessary to have the funds for sacrifices 
in hand and ready to be allocated by the beginning of Nisan, the month of 
spring proper when Pesach is celebrated. So the announcement of the due 
time was made a month early, and families used that month to make sure they 
had ready the required half-shekel per person. Even the poor, living on 
communal contributions, were required to contribute that much—and even 
the rich, owning large fields, were required to give no more; so for this 
purpose every Israelite was absolutely equal. 
Nowadays, when the half-shekel commandment no longer applies be- 
cause the Temple no longer stands, the tradition of reading the Torah 
portion continues for three reasons: . 
- As the Prophet Hosea said, with the passionate prayer and study of our 
lips we can fulfill the relationship to God that in ancient times was fulfilled 
by sacrifice. 
- For some, the reading stands as a reminder of the fervent hope that 
when Messiah comes to bring the days of peace and justice, the Holy Temple 
can be rebuilt in Jerusalem. 
- It underlines the universal obligation to share in communal upbuild- 
ing—to renew Jewish thought and culture, to rescue the oppressed, to feed 
the hungry, and to heal the sick. One of the Talmudic rabbis points out that 
it is with an offer of money that Haman persuades the King to issue the 
unholy order for the extermination of the Jews; it is therefore necessary for 
the Jewish people to give their money for a holy purpose before Purim, so that 
their lives and souls can be ransomed in advance. Today we might say that 
Shabbos Shekalim teaches us to hallow the money that could be used for 
deadly ends, by turning it toward life. 
“When Adar arrives,” says the Talmud, “multiply mirth.” Yet the 
Shabbos immediately before Purim (one or two weeks after Shabbos Sheka- 
lim) emphasizes not mirth but the dangers of the Purim story. This is Shabbos 
Zachor—the Shabbos of ‘“‘Remember!” The passage read from the Torah is 
Deuteronomy 25:17—19, and the haftarah is I Samuel 15:1—34. In the first, we 
read: 
Remember what Amalek did to you on the road as you came out of 
Egypt—how he met you on the road and with no reverence for God, 
attacked all your stragglers in the rear, those who were famished and 
weary. Therefore, when the Lord your God gives you security from all 
your enemies around you, in the land that the Lord Your God is giving 
you for an inherited possession, you shall blot out the memory of 
Amalek from under heaven. Do not forget! 
The haftarah describes how the Israelite King Saul, having destroyed all 
of Amalek except King Agag, spares Agag as if a brother King were due 
special consideration—to the wrath of God and the Prophet Samuel. 


120 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
The two readings prepare us for Purim because the Scroll of Esther tells 
us that Haman is a descendant of Agag. In other words, he represents the 
radical evil that Amalek became when it made war not on warriors but on 
the weakest of the people. Not even the ancient slavemaster Egypt and the 
ancient conqueror Assyria are irredeemable in the eyes of Jewish tradition, 
but the ultimate wickedness of singling out the weak to be destroyed cannot 
be forgiven or forgotten. So beneath all the hilarity of Purim, the rabbis 
reminded us of the deadly danger of oppression and extermination—a danger 
to be remembered so powerfully and paradoxically that we must not forget to 
blot out the memory of such evil. 
During the day before Purim begins—that is, from dawn to sundown on 
the 13th of Adar—we observe the Fast of Esther. Its timing accords not with 
that of Esther's own fast before she dares to explain to the King who she is, 
but with the dreadful day of fear and battle when groups of Jews and Haman’s 
gangs were struggling for their lives in the towns and cities of Persia. So this 
day, too, underlines the anxiety and tension of the struggle to live under 
murderous oppression. Then, at nightfall, comes release. 
@>> THE PRACTICE OF PURIM «ee 
For all cities except those that have been surrounded by a wall since the 
days when Joshua led the Israelite conquest of the land of Canaan, the Scroll 
of Esther—usually called simply the Megillah (Scroll) —is read after sundown 
on the fourteenth of Adar. Because in the ancient Persian capital city of 
Shushan, the battles between Jews and anti-Semites lasted one day longer 
and the feasting and celebration thus came one day later, there is a Shushan 
Purim one day later. Shushan Purim occurs on the fifteenth of Adar, theoret- 
ically in all old walled cities, but nowadays in practice only in Jerusalem and 
Shushan itself, now the Iranian city of Susa. 
Adar is the month that is repeated in the seven Jewish leap years that are designated in every cycle of nineteen years, in order to redress the imbalance of the solar and lunar calendars. So the question arose: in a year with two Adars, in which is Purim celebrated? The Talmud answers that in order to keep Purim close to Pesach, it should be celebrated in Adar II. 
Wherever possible, Jews gather in their synagogues to read and hear the Megillah. Even in congregations that exempt women from most of the com- mandments that must be fulfilled at a specific time, the commandment to hear the Megillah applies to women. Children also come, except for the very youngest. If someone is too isolated on Purim night to join a minyan, s/he is obligated to read the Megillah anyway—even alone, if necessary. 
As the congregation gathers, according to custom each participant gives to a tzedakah fund for the poor three halves of the unit coin of the country’s currency—halves in honor of the half-shekel required when the Temple 


PURIM + ]2] 
stood, and three because teruzmah—offering—is mentioned three times in the 
passage read on Shabbos Shekalim. In many households, the custom is to 
give three halves for each member of the household—including unborn 
children. This tzedakah is not considered a fulfillment of the obligation 
mentioned in the Megillah to give help to the poor during Purim. 
As the congregation arrives, it is clear that this is to be no usual evening 
service. The children—and in many congregations the adults—are in cos- 
tume. Many are carrying a range of noisemakers: pots and pans, groggers that 
rattle one piece of metal against another when swung in a circle, anything 
that will groan or screech or bang. In some congregations the grown-ups are 
carrying various kinds of mellowing drinks to share. (Recently in some 
chavurah congregations, some members may mellow themselves by smoking 
instead of drinking.) If the children are going to carry out the Purimshpiel 
tradition by presenting a Purim play, they may do it now—for after the 
service they will probably be too tired. 
The evening service begins with levity. The words may get scrambled, 
someone may tie the cantor’s shoelaces together. But in the standing, 
murmured amidah prayer, there is a more serious note of focusing on Purim. 
The passage that is inserted begins with the same formula as the prayer during 
Hanukkah: 
On account of the miracles and the deliverance, the triumphs and 
liberations and battles that you accomplished for our forebears in these 
days at this season—It was in the days of Mordechai and Esther in the 
capital city Shushan that there arose against them the wicked Haman. 
He sought to destroy, to murder, and to annihilate all the Jews, from 
child to hoary-headed sage, even babies and women, in one day—the 
thirteenth day of Adar, the twelfth month—and to plunder their 
property. But You in Your great motherly compassion frustrated his plot 
and undid his plan. You made his actions recoil upon his own head, so 
that [quoting Megillah 9:25] “they impaled him and his sons on the 
stake.” 
After the amidah, the congregation punctuates the service with a full 
Kaddish and turns to reading the Megillah. 
Three blessings are said before the reading: 
Baruch atah Adonai eloheynu melech ha-olam asher kid’shanu b’mitz- 
votav vitzivanu al mikra megillah. 
Blessed are You, Lord our God, ruler of all space-time, who has made us 
holy with your commandments and has commanded us about reading 
the Megillah. 


122 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Baruch atah Adonai eloheynu melech ha-olam sheh-asah nissim 
l’avoteynu ba-yamim ha-heym bazman hazeh. 
Blessed are You. . . Who performed miracles for our forebears in these 
days at this time of year. 
Baruch atah Adonai eloheynu melech ha-olam sheh-hechianu 
v’ki’manu v’higianu lazman hazeh. 
Blessed are You. . . Who has given us life, lifted us up, and brought us 
to this moment. 
Then the reader spreads out the scroll and folds it, leaf upon leaf, 
because the Megillah refers to the letters that Mordechai and Esther sent to 
the people proclaiming Purim—and letters are customarily read spread out, 
not rolled like the Torah scroll. Since the commandment is that everyone 
should read or hear read every word of the Megillah, some congregants may 
bring their own copy to murmur aloud, so as not to miss anything in the 
hubbub. 
For hubbub there is. When Haman’s name is reached in Chapter III, the 
congregants try to drown it out. In joyful obedience to the Torah’s command 
to “blot out the memory of Amalek” and in angry recognition of Haman’s 
family resemblance to Amalek, they bang, rattle, swing, bash the noisemak- 
ers they are carrying. Some have written Haman’s name on bits of paper— 
which they gleefully tear up and scatter to the winds—or on the soles of their 
shoes, which they joyfully rub upon the floor. Some have also written the names of later Hamans—monsters of anti-Semitism or of other tyrannies— 
who seem to be spiritual descendants of Amalek. 
There are certain special customs for the reading. At the four verses of 
redemption, the congregation reads the verse aloud and then the reader repeats it: “There was a Jew in Shushan. . .” (2:4), “And Mordechai left the King’s presence in royal robes . . .” (8:15), “For the Jews there was light and joy, gladness and honor . . .” (8:16), “For Mordechai the Jew ranked next to King Ahasuerus . . .” (10:3). The passage beginning “That night, sleep deserted the king” (6:1) is read with special emphasis and a different melody, for that is when the salvation of the Jews begins developing. And the recitation of the killing of Haman’s ten sons and close lieutenants (9:6-10) is recited in a single breath. Presumably this is to emphasize their common fate for their common complicity in genocide; but the effect is to increase the breathlessness, the tumult, and the hilarity of the reading. 
After the Megillah is completed, a blessing is recited: 
Blessed are You, Lord our God, King of the universe, who has con- tended for us and defended our cause, avenging us by bringing retribu- 


PURIM + ]23 
tion on all our mortal enemies and delivering us from our adversaries. 
Blessed are You, Lord, who delivers His people Israel from all their 
adversaries—God who saves. 
And then two hymns are sung: 
It was You who frustrated the wiles of the peoples and annulled all their 
scheming devices when there rose up against us the wicked Haman, 
arrogant offspring of the seed of Amalek. In his pride and vanity he dug 
himself a pit, and his overweening grandeur ensnared him. He planned 
to catch and he was caught, he sought to destroy and was fast des- 
troyed. Haman revealed the hate borne by his fathers, and stirred in 
their progeny hate of their brothers. He did not remember the kindness 
of Saul, from whose sparing of Agag this cruel foe was born. The 
wicked intrigued to destroy the good, but the foul was caught by the 
hands of the pure. Mordechai’s kindness overcame Saul’s error, while 
the wicked Haman heaped sin upon sin, hiding in his heart his schem- 
ing intentions while addicting himself to carrying out evil. He 
stretched out his hand against God’s holy ones, and gave of his wealth 
to cut off their name. 
When Mordechai saw that this wrath was unleashed and heard 
edicts of Haman proclaimed in Shushan, he robed himself in sackcloth 
and was bound up in mourning, proclaiming a fast and sitting in ashes. 
Who then would arise to atone for past erring, winning pardon for 
ancestors’ error and sin? A blossom sprang forth from the palm tree 
when Hadassah arose to stir those who slept. Her attendants hastened 
to Haman to cause him to drink snake’s venomous wine. By his greed 
he had risen, he fell through his sin; he built a gallows and was himself 
hanged upon it. People the world over gaped in amazement when the 
pur (lot) cast by Haman became our Purim. The blameless were saved 
from the hand of the sinner, and the foe met his doom in their stead. 
The Jews then resolved to establish Purim for rejoicing and happiness 
every year. You, God, hearkened to the prayers of Mordechai and 
Esther, while Haman and his sons were given to the gallows. 
The lily of Israel broke forth in rejoicing when they all saw 
Mordechai robed in royal purple. You have always been their Savior, 
their hope in every generation, making known that all who hope in 
You never shall be shamed, and all who trust in You never be dishon- 
ored. 
Abhorred is the memory of Haman who sought to destroy us; but 
the memory of the Jew Mordechai is a blessing. 
Abhorred is the memory of Zeresh, wife of him who appalled us; 
but the memory of the protective Esther is a blessing. 
May Harbonah’s memory be recalled for good. 


124 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Shosha-nat ya-akov tzoholoh v’somechoh birotom yachad techelet 
Mor-de-chai. T’shu-l-som ho-yita lanetzach v’tikvotom b'chol dor 
vodor. 
Then the congregation completes the regular evening service. In some 
places, this may be the moment for the adults to put on their own more 
bawdy Purimshpiel and to get more mellow. Soon the congregants will wend 
their way home—perhaps a little staggered by their own hilarity, perhaps a 
little clearer than usual about the funnier confusions of the world. 
On Purim morning, although work is not forbidden as it would be on the 
Torah festivals, it is viewed by many traditional Jews as better avoided. In 
any case, there will be a sense of relaxation, of loosening the juices and 
unbuttoning the formalities. At the morning service, the Torah passage of 
Exodus 17:8-16, is read. It describes the original attack of Amalek upon 
Israel, and ends, “The Lord will be at war with Amalek throughout the ages.” 
Then the Megillah is read again—to the tune of somewhat less pandemo- 
nium—and a Purim-rabbi—a mock’ rabbi chosen for the occasion—might 
give a sermon that pokes fun at established traditions and institutions. 
After the service, congregants will share hamantaschen. These three- 
cornered cookies filled with mohn or poppy seeds were originally called in 
Yiddish mohntaschen—poppy-seed pockets. The name was changed by folk custom and was said to refer to Haman’s three-cornered hat shaped like 
Haman’s pockets. 
Since the Megillah mentions that Purim must be celebrated by sending 
gifts (specifically plural), the understanding grew up that at least two delica- cies, hamantaschen or some other special cooked food, should be sent to at least one friend—shalachmanos, as they were called, or literally ‘send gifts’. 
Most households send many more shalachmanos to their friends in the community. Even more important, however, is the sending of help to the poor—food, clothes, or money. The tradition grew up that at least two different poor people must be recipients of a gift from each household. The command to give this tzedakah on Purim is separate both from the general obligation of tzedakah and from the contribution of those half-shekels before the Purim evening service. This command must be fulfilled during the day of Purim itself and must come from money specially set aside—not be deducted from one’s general tzedakah fund. On Purim day, anyone who asks for charity must be given it—without investigating whether the beggar is worthy. In traditional Jewish towns and neighborhoods, during the general scurrying to and fro to carry shalachmanos to friends and contributions to the poor, teams of Purimshpielers also tour the streets—juggling and singing, dancing and acting, wearing costumes and mugging, presenting playlets out of Jewish history. In Oriental Jewish communities (and until a few centuries ago among Western Jews as well) the children might hang and burn a rag-doll effigy of Haman that they had made before Purim. 


PURIM + 125 
After the afternoon service, households gather for the Purim-seudah, or 
celebratory meal. Among the traditional dishes are kreplach and peas— 
especially chickpeas (nahit or bub). For Queen Esther is said to have eaten 
chickpeas in the king’s palace in order to avoid eating non-kosher foods. The 
table is dominated by a gigantic Purim challah or koiletch, so big it gives rise 
to a folk blessing. After someone had sneezed four or five times in a row and 
“Gesundheit” was clearly unavailing, the Jews of Eastern Europe might say: 
“Tzu voksen tzu kvellen vi lahng und vi breit vi a Purim koiletch—May you 
feel good and grow big—as long and as broad as a Purim challah.” 
After the New World fowl of turkeys became available to Jews, under 
the name Tamegol Hodu or cock of India—the Americas here being mistaken 
for the Indies by Columbus—turkey meat became for some a special Purim 
food. For Ahasuerus reigned “from India to Ethiopia” and was a foolish king 
beside—the turkey! 
In Tel Aviv, beginning in the 1920s the custom grew of having, on 
Purim afternoon, a parade and carnival called Adloyada from ad lo yada— 
until you don’t know—from the Talmudic command to get mellow “until you 
don’t know the difference between ‘Blessed be Mordechai’ and ‘Cursed be 
Haman.’ ” Part of the festivities in Tel Aviv is a beauty contest to choose 
Queen Esther from among the women. 
THE MEANING OF PURIM 
There are two traditional sayings about Purim that raise profound ques- 
tions about the festival. One takes a more formal traditional name for Yom 
Kippur—Yom Hakippurim—and reworks it as Yom Haki-purim, the day that is 
like Purim. How could there be any similarity between the most sublime and 
solemn day in all the calendar, when all bodily needs drop away, and the 
bawdiest day of the year, when the body’s desires are fulfilled and overful- 
filled? 
One answer may lie in ki-purim, like a lottery. For on Yom Kippur lots 
are cast between the goats: one for sacrifice, one for sending into the 
wilderness. Purim gets its name from the lots cast by Haman to choose, as the 
day on which to destroy the Jews, the most propitious day for himself and 
the least propitious for the Jews. Another similarity between the days is that 
both remind us that chance has an important role in the world, but does not 
rule the world. There is absurdity in the world, but the world is not absurd. 
Do Purim and Yom Kippur both teach us that we must expect the unex- 
pected, cope with the unpredictable—by tuning our responses to a sense of 
ultimate harmony and order? © 
The second comment of the rabbis is that “all the festivals will one day 
cease, but the days of Purim will never cease.” That is, Purim will continuc 
even in the Messianic Age. 


126 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Why, of all the festivals, will this one that reminds us of Amalek, of 
radical evil, survive even into the days when radical evil has dissolved? 
Precisely because especially then, when people will think that evil has dis- 
appeared, we must remember to keep blotting out the memory of Amalek? 
And why, of all the festivals, will this one that celebrates the volcanic 
energies of laughter, sexuality, violence—the buried id—survive even into 
the days when the unconscious will have been integrated into a wholeness of 
personality? Precisely because especially then, when people will think the id 
has disappeared, we must open ourselves up to gusts of anger, bellows of 
laughter, waves of desire? 
Or are these two comments—about Yom Kippur and the Days of Mes- 
siah—really one? Are both of them saying that the one holiday a serious- 
minded people might be tempted to disdain is really as important as Yom 
Kippur, as eternal as the Messianic Age? Are they reminding us that the 
excesses of Purim, its craziness, its bawdiness, are really its profound 
strengths—that we must remember how ultimately powerful are laughter and 
craziness? 
>> NEW APPROACHES €ee 
That Purim is a gigantic joke on anti-Semitism (represented by the recoil of Haman’s hatred on his own head) has been apparent for many 
centuries. That it is also a joke on anti-feminism (represented by the recoil of the King’s contempt for Queen Vashti on his own head) has only become 
apparent in our own generation. 
Or has it? What did it mean for the ancient midrash to say that Mehuman—the king’s minister who advises him to get rid of troublesome 
Queen Vashti—is the same as Haman—the king’s minister who advises him to massacre the troublesome Jews? What did Haman mean when he con- demned “‘a certain people, dispersed in all your provinces, who keep them- selves apart”? Did he mean the Jews alone—or also women? Did he mean Vashti, who kept herself apart? 
Do we learn from the Megillah that those who will not treat Jews as human will also not treat women as human? That Haman and Mehuman are the same oppressor because they do the same oppression? That the hatred of the different ones—the ones who Haman says will not bow down, will not obey the King’s laws—that hatred is one hatred? And that just as the oppression of women and of the Jewish people is intertwined, so their victories are intertwined? That the victory, the freedom of the Jewish people will only come with the victory, the freedom, of womankind? 
We celebrate Purim one month before Passover. It is, in fact, a bawdy Passover. The destruction of Haman is a bawdy version of the destruction of the Pharaoh. And the victory of Esther is a bawdy version of the victory of 


PURIM + 127 
the Song of Songs, which we read on Passover. It is a woman who leads the 
Song of Songs, and some modern readers think the Song celebrates a kind of 
flowing spirituality that arises from women’s experience. Just as Passover 
according to tradition cannot be fulfilled unless we read the Song of Songs in 
addition to the Haggadah, so Purim could not be celebrated without Esther 
alongside Mordechai. 
What does it mean that we celebrate a bawdy Purim just one month 
before the sublimity of Pesach? Why is it that—in exploring the same 
themes—at Purim we interrupt the Scroll with noisemaking, with laughter, 
and with getting drunk, while at Passover we interrupt the Haggadah with 
Four Questions and with four serious cups of wine? 
When the original history happened, the sublime liberation of Exodus 
came long before the farce of Purim. But when we finish living that history 
and begin to learn it, absorb it into our lives, digest it so that we can make a 
holy future, then it may be important for us to laugh first, to let the farce 
come first. For power is funny, and those who hold power are ridiculous. The 
first stage of liberation is that we learn to laugh at them. 
But power is also profound, and liberation is also at the root of all the 
universe. Having learned to laugh, we become ready to seek our freedom 
seriously. There is a time to laugh—and then there is a time to ask questions. 
Out of this whole sense of Purim, what might we learn to do? 
- Write Purimshpiels that mock male chauvinism as well as anti- 
Semitism; that make Vashti a heroine alongside Esther. 
- Organize a center for battered women named the House of Vashti, and 
raise tzedakah money for it on Purim. 
- Demonstrate in a Purimdik way against some center of oppression— 
political or sexual. The demonstration could take the form of ridicule rather 
than solemnity, could use costumes and street theater. Could the Purim style 
be used against a neo-Nazi demonstration, for example? Could Jews have 
dealt with the planned Nazi demonstration in Skokie by organizing an 
aggressively funny parody counter-demonstration—with large balloon-figures 
of Mussolini hanged and Hitler sprawling in the bunker, super-noisemakers, 
and burlesqued storm-trooper uniforms—that would have surrounded and 
drowned out the Nazis? 
- Organize a festival of Jewish folk arts that emphasizes Jewish jokes— 
not only the story-telling kind of joke, but humor in dance, painting, 
cartooning, music, in the films of Lenny Bruce, and the songs of Tom Lehrer. 
- As part of the cost of admission to the festival, require participants to 
make up, wear costumes, change roles, turn their identities inside out. 
- Devote part of the proceeds of the festival to a tzedakah project. 
Perhaps give participants a ballot with a brief description of a few alternative 
tzedakah projects, and ask them to vote, or to give weights to the various 
choices. 
- If there isn’t time to organize a festival, gather some friends for an 


128 » SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
afternoon of singing, exchanging small gifts, and collecting tzedakah money 
for the poor. Pose a contest, bringing laughter to bear on some Highly Sacred 
Idol. For example—who can propose the funniest peace settlement for the 
Arab-Israeli conflict? (It might even work; it would be hard to find worse 
failures than all the serious ones that have been tried.) 
>> SONGS €€em 
The boisterous and ironic songs of Purim have been important to its 
hilarity. A brief selection—one Yiddish, one traditional English, and a more 
recent song that follows up on the feminist view of Purim: 
Heint iz Pur-im bri-der, S’iz der yom-tov grois. 
Lo-mir zing-en lie-der, un geyn fun hoiz tzu hoiz. Lach 
Mord-che-le lach, a yom-tov-’! mach, kinds 
kind-er ge-denk-en dem nes. Zingt bri-der-lach, zingt, tantzt 
frai-lach un shpringt, dem tei-er-en nes nisht far-gest. 
Ho-mon iz a ro-sho, dos veist ye-der yid, 
O-ber Got nish-ko-shoh, shveigt dem ro-sho nit, 
Vart Ho-mon-ke, vart, du zei nit ge-nart 
A nes hot ge-ton mit unz Got 
Zingt kin-der-lach zingt, tantzt frei-lach un shpringt 
Macht kin-der-lach gre-ser dem rod. 
Oh, once there was a wick-ed, wick-ed man, And 
Ha-man was his name, Sir, He would have mur-dered 
ali the Jews Tho’ they were not to blame, Sir. 
(Chorus) 
Oh, to-day we'll mer-ry, mer-ry be, Oh, to-day we'll 
mer-ry, mer-ry be, Oh, to-day we'll 
mer-ry, mer-ry be, And “nash” some “Ho-men-tash-en.” 
And Esther was the lovely queen Of 
King Ahasuerus, When Ha-man said he’d 
kill us all, Oh, my how he did scare us. 
(Chorus) 
But Mordecai her cousin bold, 
Said “What a dreadful chutzpah, 
If guns were but invented now, 
This Haman I would shoot, Sir.” 
(Chorus) 


PURIM + 129 
When Esther speaking to the King 
Of Haman’s plot made mention, 
“Ha, Ha,” said he, “Oh, no he won't! 
I'll spoil his bad intention.” 
(Chorus) 
The guest of honor he shall be, 
This clever Mr. Smarty, 
And high above us he shall swing 
At a little hanging party. 
(Chorus) 
Of all his cruel and unkind ways 
This little joke did cure him 
And don’t forget we owe him thanks 
For this jolly feast of Purim. 
(Chorus) 
Vashti’s Song* 
(Sing to the tune of “Artzah alinu”) 
Esther, mein shvester, 
Esther, mein shvester, 
The King will just pester you. 
He will just use you, 
He will abuse you, 
He might just bruise you too. 
Join me, sister— 
Fight that mister! 
Liberation— 
Feel that sensation! 
Emancipation, too. 
Emancipation too... 
Emancipation too! 
*By Sue Roemer 


130 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
@>> FOODS * €€ee 
HAMANTASCHEN 
DOUGH cutter—32 inch large size jar lid may be used 
6 cups flour dash of salt 
3 teaspoons baking powder grated rind of lemon 
Y4 cup water | scant cup sugar 
3 eggs ¥ cup oil 
Ya Ib. vegetable fac (like Crisco) 
Mix flour, baking powder, salt, sugar. Add beaten eggs, fat, oil, lemon, and 
water. May add a little more flour and water if dough is too short to handle. 
Retrigerating increases workability, but not essential. Roll scant Y% inch 
thick, I use spatula to help in lifting after filling. Will make about fifty 
hamantaschen. 
POPPY SEED MINTURE—MOHN (enough for 50-60) 
1 tablespoon oil Y cup honey 
2 cups seeds (10 oz. box) 2 tablespoons bread crumbs 
1 cup water Ys |b. walnuts 
1 egg well beaten Ys teaspoon cinnamon 
¥y Ib. raisins Vs teaspoon each nutmeg, ginger, 
2 or 3 tablespoons jam cloves 
Vy cup sugar dash of sale 
L lemon juice and rind 
Pour boiling water over seeds. Let stand until cool. Drain, put in pot, add 1 
cup boiling water. Cook until dry. Watch and stir. May have a small amount 
of water to be drained off. Grind seeds, nuts, raisins. Add rest of ingredients. 
Mix well. Taste. May need a little more lemon and spices. Fill dough circles, 
bring owo sides to center forming point and top down to meet with sides, 
forming a triangle. Pinch the seams closed and glaze with beaten egg mixed 
with 1 tablespoon water, Bake 350-375° until golden brown. 
PRUNE MIXTURE (enough for 50-60) 
Ib. prunes 
2 Ib. raisins ~ l 4 cup bread crumbs Vy + cup honey 
¥y Tb. walnuts Y4 teaspoon cinnamon 
| grated apple 8 teaspoon each nutmeg, cloves, 4 
] ~ 
~. 
tablespoons jam ginger 
tablespoon oil | lemon juice and rind 
“Recipes by Hannah Waskow and Rose Gertz. 


PURIM - 13] 
Cook prunes until soft, drain well, remove pits and grind with raisins and 
nuts. Add rest of ingredients. Mix well. Taste. May need a little more lemon 
and spices. Glaze with beaten egg and 1 tablespoon water. Sprinkle with 
cinnamon and sugar mixture. Bake 350-375° until golden brown. The 
sprinkle makes it possible to tell the difference between the prune and mohn 
hamantaschen. 
NOTES ON HAMANTASCHEN RECIPE 
Double the dough recipe if both kinds of hamantaschen are baked. If any 
mixture is left over it can be frozen for later use with cookie dough or yeast 
dough. Left over dough can be used for cookies. 
All spices and lemon are approximate. Freshness of spices, and size and 
tartness of lemons make a difference. Adjust to taste. Fillings should be 
slightly tart, since baking removes some of the tartness. Orange rind and a 
little orange juice may be added to either filling. A little prune juice may be 
added to the prune mixture if it seerns hard. The prune mixture tends to dry 
in baking. May need 2 or 3 tablespoons of juice. 
1 lb. of seeds is 3 cups, 10 oz. container is 2 cups. 
@>> GO AND STUDY €€e® 
See Philip Goodman, The Purim Anthology (Jewish Publication Society), 
and Irving Greenberg, Guide to Purim (National Jewish Resource Center, 
NYC). 


“and Miriam. . . took a timbrel in her hand. . .”” (Exodus 15:20) Miriam led 
the women in song and dance with her timbrel, or tambourine, at the sea 
shore as the Jews crossed the divided Red Sea and left Egypt. 


Keo> CHAPTER NINE «ee 
GIVING BIRTH 
TO FREEDOM— 
PESACH 
vi Bis month of spring—the first month, says the Torah: time to begin. 
As the flowers rise up against winter, so the Israelites rise up against Pharaoh. 
The peoplehood of Israel is born—and we celebrate the freedom of new births 
and new beginnings. The feverish hilarity of early spring, of Purim, becomes 
a more directed, more devoted vigor. 
@2>> ORIGINS <eem 
Many scholars believe that Pesach is a fusion of two early festivals—one 
of shepherds, one of farmers—that welcomed spring in two quite different 
ways. As the month of lambing begins in the flock, the shepherds may have 
celebrated the flock’s fertility by sacrificing a sheep, smearing its blood on the 
doorposts of their tents, dancing a skipping Pesach dance around their 
campfires. 
As for the farmers—in preparation for the harvest of spring barley and 
wheat, they may have cleared out from their homes and storehouses all the 
chametz, the sour dough, the starter dough they used to make the bread rise. 
It may have felt right to them to celebrate the new crop by starting over—not 
only starting over for the year’s new crop, but starting over in their history by 
eating the most ancient bread of all, the flat unleavened bread that was the 
beginning of the farmer’s food. 
So before the beginning of the people Israel there seems to have been a 
Cy REE 


134 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
farmer's festival of unleavened bread and a shepherd's festival of the pesach 
(pass-over, skipping) sacrifice. When in Exodus 12 and 13 the Torah de- 
scribes the birth of the people, it hints of these double origins even as it 
brings these two main elements of observance and ritual together. 
When and how did the two forms get connected? Some scholars think 
that the shepherds’ ceremony was transformed first: that the celebration of 
the lambing season was turned into the great festival of liberation. Some 
crisis stirred the people to a white-hot intensity that enabled them to melt 
down the old forms and recast them, proclaiming a new birth and a new 
purpose. The festival itself tells us what this was. Among some crucial 
nomadic shepherd clans that became the history-bearers of the People Israel, 
the eruption of a desire for freedom was so strong that it shattered their 
subjection to the power of the Pharaoh of all Egypt. Their desire for freedom 
was so intense that those clans experienced the direct intrusion into their 
own life-histories of the awesome Power that lay at the root of all history and 
all new birth. 
As the story has come down to us, the small Israelite clans which came 
to Egypt under royal protection first prospered and multiplied there. But a 
change in royal politics or family brought to power Pharaohs who feared and 
despised them. So they were subjected to forced labor on the Pharaoh’s 
city-building projects, and then to a concerted attack on their high birth- 
rate: all their boy babies were to be killed at birth. 
This decree triggered the first stages of resistance. Midwives—whether 
Hebrew or Egyptian or both is not quite clear—refused to murder babies. 
Even an Egyptian princess conspired with Israelite women to save one baby 
boy, Moses, who grew up to become a firebrand rebel. 
Moses killed an Egyptian straw boss, fled Egypt in fear of his life, and 
then married and lived for years as a shepherd and political refugee in the 
nearby wilderness. He had a child, and only then was able to experience the 
intense and fiery God-energy toward freedom that transformed the rest of his 
life. (The story intertwines the birth of children and the birth of freedom, as 
if to teach that at the root of both is new potential, whether biological and 
personal or political and historical; as if to teach that the biology of spring 
and the sociology of freedom are in some deep sense the same.) At a 
mysteriously burning bush, Moses received God’s charge to return to Egypt 
and to lead his people toward their liberation. With the help of Miriam his 
sister and Aaron his brother, Moses challenged Pharaoh, invoked ten di- 
sastrous plagues that finally shattered the Egyptian tyranny, and led his people 
into the wilderness of open space and choices. 
From the intensity of thought and feeling that accompanied this mo- 
ment of revolutionary change, there emerged a festival intended both to 
memorialize and to re-enact the moment—to keep it ever-fresh as a resource 
for renewal of the struggle to be free. In this new festival of Pesach— 


PESACH + 135 
Passover—the traditional sacrifice of the lamb in spring was re-explained as a 
ransom for the continued life of the Israelite first-born. For in the night of 
convulsion before the day of Exodus, the tenth plague or disaster struck, with 
the result that every first-born in the households of the Egyptian master- 
people died. Only where an Israelite had slaughtered a lamb and smeared its 
blood upon the doorpost did the plague of death pass-over and the first-born 
survive. 
This connection between the Pesach lamb and the rescue of the first- 
born may have evoked deep feelings at the personal, family level as well as in 
the arena of political freedoms. For the passage in Exodus makes a close 
connection between the Pesach sacrifice and the command that every first- 
born calf or lamb shall be killed for sacrifice—and that every first-born son 
shall be specially redeemed, for his life and blood are also forfeit as a sacrifice. 
It is not hard to feel that the Pesach lamb was partly a ransom against 
child sacrifice—partly a psychological substitute for killing one’s own first- 
born son, as the ram on Mount Moriah was Abraham’s substitute for killing 
his son Isaac. For the many years in which the sacrifice was carried on at local 
shrines and at the First and Second Temples, it may therefore (like circumci- 
sion) have helped discharge the tension between fathers and sons. 
Jewish tradition understood this tension well when it said that the great 
task of Elijah the Prophet was to “turn the hearts of the fathers to the sons 
and the hearts of the sons to the fathers,” and then welcomed Elijah to every 
circumcision and to every Passover Seder. In our own generation, modern 
psychologists have rediscovered the tension between the generations. If there 
were no way to discharge the tensions, some of them have said, they might 
explode into murder. So the Pesach ceremony may be a way of dealing with 
the most intimate struggles for life and freedom in the family, as well as the 
grand and glorious struggles of world history. 
This speculation is strengthened by the emphasis in the first four chap- 
ters of Exodus on childbirth as the crucial element in the Israelite search for 
freedom and in the Pharaoh’s denial of it. The effort to drown newborns, the 
midwives’ frustration of that effort, the conspiracy of Miriam with Pharaoh’s 
daughter to save the baby Moses, the birth of Moses’ own son before he can 
experience God in the burning bush, and the uncanny circumcision of that 
son before Moses can become the liberator—all these suggest a strong con- 
nection between human birth, the protection of babies, and the liberation of 
a people. Each child comes through the narrow space to bring broad new 
possibilities of freedom to the world. Perhaps the oldest Pharaoh is the 
impulse many parents feel, at one or another moment, to strangle that 
unpredictability in the cradle. 
In the long historical process of shaping the festival we know as Pass- 
over, there were many moments of change and growth. The crucial moment 
came when these separate sets of feelings about the new births in the flock of 


136 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
sheep, about newborns in the clan and family, and about the birth of political 
freedom were fused into a single extraordinary ceremony. 
What was remembered as a great transformation of symbols in the 
intense emergency of the Exodus was preserved as a teaching of those 
transformed symbols even afterward. In the book of Exodus, indeed, the 
description of the emergency celebration and the command for future 
celebrations are tightly intertwined, moving back and forth from now to 
later. It is a way of saying that the later generations were to experience the 
first event as an urgent part of their own immediate lives. Once the connec- 
tion had been made between the rebirthing powers of the flock and the 
human family, and the power of a people to politically rebirth itself, that 
connection was never forgotten. 
But then where does the week-long Feast of Unleavened Bread join the 
story? Modern scholars feel that the nomad army of liberated Israelites may 
have brought their shepherds’ festival of freedom to the settled farmers of 
Canaan. As many of the Canaanites responded to the fervent mixture of 
Israelite conquest and conversion, they connected their own history, legends 
perhaps of Abraham and Isaac, with the memories of the returning clans. 
The already settled farmers kept on celebrating their own spring festival of 
the unleavened bread and the new spring grain. They also accepted the 
shepherds’ Pesach sacrifice into their celebration of the springtime. As the 
invading nomads settled down, they preserved their own ceremonial of birth 
and liberation, and joined with their neighbors in the week-long feast of 
matzah. Yet the scholars think the two festivals may have remained distinct 
for centuries. They may even perhaps have observed at two different times in 
the month of spring—the sacrifice at the full moon; the matzah feast when- 
ever the barley harvest was ready to begin. 
The scholars suggest that not until the Babylonian exile did the two 
festivals become one. Cut off from the nature-rhythm of their own barley 
harvest in regard to the one festival and cut off from the sacrificial altar at the 
Temple in Jerusalem in regard to the other festival, the Israelites in Babylon 
may have needed the two festivals connected and their dates fixed. In exile, 
their intense desire for exodus, for freedom and a return to the land of Israel, 
may well have burned hot enough to melt down the meaning of the ceremo- 
nial meal of matzah—to fuse it with the Pesach lamb as a memorial and a demand for exodus. 
According to this theory, by the time the ancient oral traditions are woven into the text of the Book of Exodus, the matzah festival is connected with the liberation from Egypt by means of remembering that the haste of departure was so great that there was no time for the Israelites to let the dough rise in the emergency rations they had baked. 
In any case, by the time of the Second Temple, the crucial personal and communal elements of Passover had been unified. It celebrated the spring 


PESACH - 137 
equinox, the moment when the sun was born again—began anew to warm 
the northern hemisphere. It celebrated Spring in the lambing of the flocks 
and the harvesting of barley. It celebrated the life of every newborn child, 
and the joy of every family that the firstborn need not be offered up to God. It 
celebrated the birthtime of the people and their abiliry—not simply once, but 
now another time—to emerge from slavery to freedom and from exile to 
self-determination in their own land. And so Pesach had become the quintes- 
sential festival of newness, creation, creativity, freedom. 
At this point, what Pesach meant was that on the tenth of the month of 
Nisan, each family acquired a lamb—or, if it were too small or too poor to 
deal with a whole lamb of its own, shared with a neighbor. In enormous 
multitudes—more than three million strong in the year 65 C.E.—the people 
Israel converged on Jerusalem to celebrate the festival. They would sacrifice 
the lambs as the day of the fourteenth of Nisan turned into dusk and moved 
toward the evening of the fifteenth. Until midnight they would roast and eat 
the paschal lamb, with bitter herbs to remember the bitterness of slavery and 
with matzah to recall the haste of liberation. For a week they would stay in 
Jerusalem, eating only unleavened bread, telling the tales of freedom, gather- 
ing again on the seventh day for another solemn day of dedication. Sometime 
during the week they would begin to wave before God's altar an omer of the 
earliest-ripened barley, starting the count of 49 days of awaiting the crop from 
different fields throughout the land of Israel as the barley ripened—a count 
that itself would ripen on the festival of Shavuot. And after the seventh day 
they would return to their homes. 
Late in the period of the Second Temple, under the influence of 
Hellenistic and Roman culture, the Pesach feast became a carefully ordered 
meal that borrowed from the pattern of the Greek and Roman symposium, or 
discussion banquet. As this pattern developed, the Mishnah—a collection 
and codification of those traditions and practices of Jewish life approved by 
the early rabbis—laid out how to do the order, the Seder, of the Pesach meal. 
In its essentials, this Seder became the pattern that was put into the Hagga- 
dah—the telling of Passover—and thus became the pattern for the meal as we 
have it for our own generation. 
One of the major elements introduced by the Mishnah, borrowing from 
the symposium, was the drinking of four cups of wine—two early in the meal, 
two after the meal was over. The custom of reclining during the meal as an 
expression of freedom also drew on Roman custom—for free citizens in 
Roman times would recline to eat a formal dinner. 
There is also a tradition, passed on by word of mouth alone until our 
own day, that the Seder of Roman times which the Haggadah itself de- 
scribes—the Seder in which Rabbi Akiba and four colleagues talk all night— 
was actually the occasion for discussing and planning an uprising against the 
Imperial power. Akiba’s insistence on adding to the Passover Seder’s blessing 


138 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
over God’s redemptive power in Egypt, a passage looking forward toward 
restoration of the Temple that the Romans had destroyed, and Akiba’s 
support for the Bar Kochba revolt against Rome as a Messianic event, were 
presumably connected with the discussion at this famous Seder in the town 
of B’nei Brak. This may have been the first occasion when Passover was 
consciously used not only as a celebration of God’s gift of freedom in the past 
but as an incitement of collective human action for freedom toward the 
future. 
Between the codification of the Mishnah (end of the second century 
C.E.) and the collection of the Gemara’s commentaries on it (three centuries 
later), there were some changes in the text and arrangement of the Seder. 
The Mishnah lays out several questions to be asked by a child (in some texts 
three, in some four). One of these questions is about the roast lamb of the 
Pesach sacrifice. After the destruction of the Temple had not only occurred 
but lasted for several centuries, so that the restoration of the sacrifices no 
longer seemed imminent and the question about them was irrelevant to the 
actual Seder meal, the Gemara replaced this question with one about reclin- 
ing. So at this point the child’s questions became the Four Questions that we 
have today, all built upon the crucial question “Why is this night different 
from all other nights?” For on this night we eat only matzah; we eat bitter 
herbs; we twice dip food, into salt water and chopped fruit; we recline at the 
table. Why? 
The Gemara also described a shift of the telling parts of the ritual from 
their earlier position during the meal to a place after only a symbolic green 
vegetable had been eaten and before the actual meal, probably to make sure 
the telling was done well and thoroughly before the effects of wine and food 
had dulled the abilities of the celebrants. 
There were several debates among the Talmudic rabbis as to what the 
text of the telling on Pesach night should be. Some of these may seem at first 
glance picayune, but when we probe a little there is often revealed some basic 
moral issue. One of these disagreements was the one between Tarfon and 
Akiba over whether to refer to a future redemption and the restoration of the 
Temple. Another began out of a consensus that the story should start out by 
telling of the Israelites’ original degraded status, and rise to their glorious 
redemption. But then the consensus turned into a dispute over what degrada- 
tion to begin with: the slavery in Egypt, or the idolatrous beliefs of Abraham’s 
family? This dispute was resolved by starting with both: “We were slaves to 
Pharaoh in Egypt . . . ” and “Our forebears served as slaves to idols. . . ” 
Even the cup of Elijah results from a debate over whether there should 
be four or five cups of wine. The compromise was to have a fifth cup but not 
to drink from it or say the blessing, and in time this became known as the cup that awaited Elijah’s visit to announce the Messianic redemption (may it come soon and in our own day). 


PESACH + 139 
Another, much more playful, debate arose over how many plagues really 
happened in Egypt—ten, fifty, two hundred? This debate is presented verba- 
tim in the Haggadah—and takes on a more profound meaning when we 
notice that the various proposed numbers of plagues add up to 613, which is 
also the total number of God’s commandments according to a traditional 
view. So the Haggadah hints that the ten plagues of Egypt stand opposite the 
Ten Commandments of Sinai; and that there are 613 plagues standing 
opposite the 613 commandments. For every commandment unfulfilled, there 
is a plague... 
In the Gaonic period in Babylon, these discussions continued and 
gradually the results crystallized into a more-or-less agreed text and order of a 
service for Passover night. This text first appeared as part of the earliest 
Jewish prayerbook in the ninth century. By the eleventh century, the text 
was almost identical with the traditional Haggadah used today, with the 
exception of the verses beginning “Pour out Your wrath,” which were added 
as a furious response to anti-Semitic outbursts during the Crusades. The 
earliest appearance of a separate Passover Haggadah seems to have been in 
the twelfth century. The songs sung after completion of the regular service 
first appeared in the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries. 
During the past century, under the stimulus of profound changes in 
Jewish life, a number of modified Haggadahs have been used by parts of the 
Jewish community, beginning with Reform and Reconstructionist editions in 
the United States and with new versions published by hundreds of non- 
religious socialist kibbutzim before and after the establishment of Israeli 
independence. During the late 1960s and early 1970s in the United States, 
political and religious upheavals among young Jews led to the publication of a 
number of different Haggadahs. Some of these expressed more or less radical 
political feelings, others expressed the determination of Jewish women to 
enter Jewish life as full equals with men, and some presented a variety of 
alternate readings from inside or outside Jewish traditional thought that could 
be used to strike up open discussion and debate at the Seder in the spirit of 
the Z’man cheruteynu, season of our freedom. 
@>)> MAKING READY €€e® 
REMOVING THE LEAVEN 
Preparations for Pesach are the most elaborate of all the Jewish year. 
They take place in both the physical realm of preparing the household by 
removing leaven, and the spiritual realm of clearing away deadliness and 
idolatry by means of prayer and Torah study. We act in the two realms 
simultaneously in parallel; here we will look at the physical first. 


140 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Renewal of the body can begin on Rosh Chodesh (the New Moon) of 
the month of Nisan, for that is when the reordering of the house and the 
cleaning out of last year’s leavening can start. The Torah’s command is that 
no chametz, leavening or souring agent, shall remain in one’s house during 
Pesach. In our own generation, different Jews apply this rule with more or less 
stringency. 
In removing the chametz, there are some traditional customs and regula- 
tions to keep in mind: regular bread is the most obvious candidate for 
removal. With it traditionally went all cereals and grains, especially wheat, 
barley, spelt, oats, and rye—all mentioned by the rabbis—but also corn 
(maize), not discovered until after 1492. Rice, millet, peas, and beans 
(including peanuts) were forbidden for Ashkenazic Jews, descended from 
Northern European communities. The Mediterranean-based Sephardic com- 
munities and the Oriental Jews did not feel—as did the Ashkenazic rabbis— 
that these foods might be ground into flour, get confused with the originally 
prohibited grains, and seduce Jews toward eating those grains. 
Alcoholic liquors based on grain (which include beer and practically all 
other alcohol except wine and pure fruit brandies like slivovitz) also contain 
chametz. So does vinegar, if it is made at all from grain. Pure apple cider 
vinegar, however, even though it is sour is not considered chametz and may 
be used during Pesach. Many canned, bottled, and processed foods contain 
cornstarch, corn syrups, flour as a thickening agent, etc. All these are 
traditionally forbidden. So are non-foods that contain chametz—some cos- 
metics, inks, glues, toothpastes, etc. 
There are several approaches to consider in dealing with this chametz: 
* The very nooks and crannies of the household probably bear chametz 
in their dust; so the custom has arisen of doing an extraordinarily thorough 
spring cleaning before Pesach. 
* As for visible, palpable chametzdik foods, some people find it psycho- 
logically satisfying to finish half-loaves of bread, half-boxes of crackers, etc., 
in the two weeks before Pesach. 
* What is left can be physically removed from the house. In some 
communities, the custom has arisen of taking such foods, together with some 
money, to soup kitchens or other places that feed the (non-Jewish) desper- 
ately poor. In this way both the mitzvah of removing chametz and the mitzvah 
of tzedakah are fulfilled. If the soup kitchen or other group chosen is also 
working toward the goal of freeing the poor from poverty and powerlessness, 
then the historic message of Pesach—liberation from slavery—is also carried 
outward to the broader world. 
* The chametz can be separated from everything else in the house, put in a room or a large box that is sealed closed, and the chametz can then be formally and legally sold to a non-Jew. It may be advisable to arrange this through a rabbi, or other person trained in Jewish traditions, who is knowl- 


PESACH - ]4] 
edgeable in this particular practice. Untrained individuals may find it useful 
to consult as a model the legal formulas for this sale printed on pages 36-39 of 
Section 3 on Festivals of the Code of Jewish Law (Ganzfried-Goldin, ed., 
Hebrew Publishing Co.). This arrangement allows the chametzdik food to be 
sold before Pesach and bought back for the same price afterward. In some 
congregations, the custom has arisen of making the sale to a non-Jewish 
charitable organization—for example, Oxfam, which tries to deal with the 
world hunger problem—and then donating part or all of the cost of the food 
after its repurchase. 
- Traditionally, all food utensils used during the regular year either need 
to be locked away after thorough washing and left unused during Pesach so 
that utensils would be used that were saved all year (under seal) for Pesach 
use alone; or else the utensils were purified of leaven by putting them in large 
pots of boiling water and putting boiling-hot stones or bricks in the pots so 
that the water (still boiling hot) would overflow the rim. Burners on the 
stove can be covered with foil, a special tablecloth used on the table, etc. 
- Special food intended for Passover is indicated by the special ‘Kosher 
L’Pesach” notation on the container with a rabbinic seal of kashrut. Fresh 
fruits and vegetables do not need this symbol; foods like fresh milk or foods 
that list ingredients and do not list any form of chametz are probably kosher in 
fact, but there is no way to be certain that chametz has not infiltrated. 
Individual households must decide whether to insist on rabbinic certification. 
Whatever the decision, after utensils have been changed or purified and the 
regular food sold or given away, only food intended for Pesach should be 
bought. 
: Traditionally, the matzah intended to fulfill the positive command to 
eat unleavened bread (which is separate from the negative command to not 
eat leavened bread) is made of only flour and water and must be completely 
baked in less than 18 minutes from when the flour is mixed with water, so 
that it has no time to rise. Special egg matzahs, fruit juice matzahs, etc., that 
use no water are not chametz; they are not fully matzah either. Traditionally, 
therefore, they may be eaten during Pesach but not as the ritual matzah of the 
Seder. Sorne households use only sh’murah matzah (guarded matzah). Its flour 
has been watched all the way back to the time of harvesting the grain to make 
sure no water has touched it. Some sh’murah matzah comes from fields that 
receive only the merest minimal amounts of rainfall. 
+ The baking of ritual matzah can itself become a spiritually uplifting 
experience. The process requires an oven capable of very high heat that can 
bake in great speed; absolutely dry flour; and fresh spring water with which 
the flour is combined just before baking. Rows of holes are put in the matzah 
in order to permit air bubbles to escape rather than leaven the bread even 
unintentionally. Directions for baking can be found on pages 143-145 of The 
First Jewish Catalog. (But it is very unlikely that such private baking can meet 


142 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
all the traditional tests for kosher matzah; so some who like to do their own 
baking eat this matzah before Pesach begins.) 
On the night before Pesach (or if it begins at the end of Shabbos, on the 
Thursday night before), there is a final hunt through the house to get rid of 
any chametz that has not been eaten, given away, or sealed off and sold. Many 
households give this search a ritual as well as practical character by having 
each member of the household hide a few chunks of bread around the house 
ahead of time—adding up to a minyan, a total of ten. Then the whole 
household can hunt. A candle—not some other kind of light—is used for this 
search, because (so the Talmud says), the human soul is God’s candle to 
search out the innards of the world. A feather (which you may want to look 
for in a public park in a pre-Pesach spring walk that afternoon) or a palm- 
branch from the lulav that has been put aside from last Sukkot may be used to 
brush the pieces of bread from their hiding place into a paper bag—so that no 
one actually is contaminated by a crumb of leaven. 
The search begins with a blessing: “Baruch atuh Adonai eloheynu 
melech ha-olam asher kid’shanu b’mitzvotav vitzivanu al biyyur chameytz. 
Blessed are You, Lord our God, Ruler of space and time, who has made us 
holy through Your commandments, and commanded us about the removal of 
leavening.” After the symbolic ten pieces have been found and any other 
chametz found along the way has also been swept up, the bag of chametz is laid 
aside. The household members use the ancient popular language, Aramaic, 
to declare: 
Kol shamira v’chamiya dika birshuti, d’la chamitey ood’la bah-aritey 
ood’la yadana ley, livril v’lehevey hefker k’afra harah. 
All leaven in my possession that I have not seen or removed or that | 
don’t know about is hereby made null and void, and ownerless as the 
dust of the earth. 
In the morning, after breakfast, this declaration is recited again and the bag of chametz is burned outside the house—beginning perhaps with the dried-out lulav. If Pesach begins Saturday night, then on Friday morning, leavening like challah for eating Friday night may be left; the rest should be burnt (since a fire cannot be kindled on Shabbos); and the declaration of nullity is delayed until after eating two briefly separated meals which use up all the remaining bread on Shabbos morning, so as to fulfill the mitzvah of eating three meals with bread every Shabbos. If later during Pesach an accidentally overlooked piece of chametz is found, a cup or pot should be placed upside down over it and then during the middle five days of semi- festival, it should be burned with the blessing, “Who has commanded us about the removal of leavening.” 


PESACH + 143 
In addition to the special problems created by a Pesach that begins on 
Saturday night, there are special problems with a Pesach that begins on 
Wednesday night. In such a year, all day. Thursday and Friday are festivals. In 
traditional homes, food can be cooked on these days for eating on these days 
or on the semi-festival days later—but food should not be cooked on the 
festival days to eat on Shabbos (and even more strongly, food should not be 
newly cooked on Shabbos itself). How then to cook for Shabbos? The rabbis 
tuled that if a family began cooking for Shabbos before Pesach began and 
continued on into the festival days, this was not the same as beginning the 
process during Pesach. 
So if Pesach begins Wednesday night, some cooking for Shabbos begins 
during the day before. That food and some matzah are singled out, and the 
household does the ceremony of eruv tavshilin, mixture for cooking, declaring 
over this food: 
Blessed are You, Lord our God, Ruler of space and time, Who has made 
us holy with Your commandments and commanded us about the “mix- 
ture.” By means of this mixture we may bake, cook, warm, kindle 
lights, and do everything necessary from holy day toward Shabbos—we 
and all Israel who live in this town. 
After 9:30 of the morning before Pesach, it is forbidden to eat chametz and it 
is the custom not to eat matzah, so as to be able to savor fully the taste of the 
first matzah at the Seder. 
First-born children traditionally do not eat at all during the daylight 
hours before Pesach, in recognition of the awesome fact that all the first-born 
children of Egypt died during the night and that the Israelite first-born were 
saved only by virtue of God’s forebearance and the Pesach sacrifice of the 
lamb and the blood on the doorposts. However, it is a mitzvah to celebrate 
with food and drink the completion of a mitzvah such as the study of a part of 
the Bible, Talmud, or other text from the tradition. So the custom has arisen 
that the first-borns of a community gather on the morning before Pesach to 
study together, and then can eat a breadless siyyum, a festive meal to 
celebrate the mitzvah. In some households, the afternoon before Pesach is a 
time to walk for an hour or two in a park or woods, enjoying the spring 
birthtime before turning to the political-historical birchtime. In some tradi- 
tional communities, it is a time to immerse in the mikveh, the ritual bath— 
not to become physically clean but to experience the purifying rest, the sense 
of oceanic union with the universe, that can come from total immersion. 
Bodies of pure running water—streams, lakes, oceans—can be used as mik- 
vehs. 
To some modern sensibilities, following the rather elaborate rituals for 
ridding the household of leaven may seem obsessive. The task may become so 


144 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
onerous—especially if it is loaded onto just one member of the household— 
that it seems to re-establish the slavery that the original Passover freed us 
from! If the toil of pre-Pesach cleaning is shared and then the Seder is greeted 
as a great shared liberation, the toil might even come to be used in a 
spiritually helpful way. 
There is also a mystical outlook on the meaning of the removal of 
chametz that can be kept in mind. According to this view, chametz is what 
lifts us up throughout the year—leads to our working harder, searching 
deeper, loving more. It is the yetzer, or swelling-impulse, of the soul. But 
allowed to swell and grow without restraint, it becomes yetzer ha-ra, the evil 
impulse. It impels us not only to productivity, but to possessiveness; not only 
to creativity, but to competitiveness; not only to love, but to jealousy and 
lust. So once a year we must clean out even the uplifting impulse; we must eat 
the flat bread of a pressed-down people. Half a year after the Tashlich 
ceremony of Rosh Hashanah, we must clean out the pockets of pride that 
have grown big again. Half a year after Yom Kippur, we must again swallow 
hard and look again at what is eating us. 
MIN DPAND SPIRIT 
While the Temple stood, the approach of Pesach was a time for every 
Israelite to clear away any aura of contact with a death. For no one who had 
touched a dead body could offer up a sacrifice to the living God without first 
going through an exercise to clear away the taboo. Pesach was the only time 
that every Israelite family brought a sacrifice. (On other festivals the priests 
made the offering, and when it was a matter of an individual guilt-offering or 
something similar, the special occasion would apply to just one person.) So to 
prepare for Pesach, the whole people heard the Torah treading about how to 
clear away the death taboo. 
Now, with the Temple gone, we read that Torah passage to cleanse ourselves of deadliness through the reading itself. The passage is about the red heifer or parah adumah, and we read it on the second Shabbos before the month of Nisan begins (or if it actually begins on Shabbos, on the Shabbos just before). This passage (Numbers 19:1-22) describes how the red heifer 
was sacrificed—its red blood sprinkled on the altar and its body burned with red cedarwood and the red spice hyssop, with a scarlet dye to make in the fire a cloud of red smoke. The heifer’s ashes were then used to clear away the uncanniness of death from the person of anyone who had touched a corpse. Along with this passage, on Shabbos Parah we read a haftarah (Ezekiel 36:13-38) in which God promises to cleanse all Israel from our idolatries. 
On the Shabbos after Shabbos Parah, we read a special Torah passage to announce that Nisan, the month of Passover, is upon us. This passage from Exodus 12, “This month shall be for you the head of the months; it is for you 


PESACH - 145 
first of the months of the year,” is added to the regular Torah portion of the 
week. Every new month is announced on the Shabbos before, but only Nisan 
is announced with a special Torah reading. This gives the month an extra 
honor, and gives the congregation a special electricity about Pesach. The 
Shabbos is called Shabbos Ha-Chodesh, Shabbos of The Month. It com- 
pletes the four special Shabbosim that began with Shabbos Shekalim and 
Shabbos Zakhor before Purim. 
Once Nisan actually begins, the community begins to collect money to 
help the poor celebrate Pesach fully. This ma-oz chittin or wheat money is 
intended to let the poor buy matzah—and by extension all their other needs 
in food, clothing, and fuel—in order freely to celebrate Pesach, the festival of 
freedom. 
Even if a man has already fulfilled the mitzvah of tzedakah, in complete 
accordance with the law, he cannot appreciate the full implication of 
freedom if he knows that his neighbor is hungry and in need. If he knew 
that there were hungry people in his town and he had not bothered to 
come to their assistance, he would be guilty of telling lies—God 
forbid—on this “watch night” when he says at the beginning of the 
Haggadah, ‘“‘Let all who are hungry come and eat.” If, however, he has 
busied himself to supply the needy with food, and then he says, 
“Perhaps there are still some poor people of whom I know not, I am 
ready to receive them at my table,” then his words are clearly sincere 
and he is rewarded for saying this just as if he had only now fed the 
hungry and gladdened the hearts of the poor (Eliyahu Kitov). 
Money for this Pesach aid is distributed to the poor before the Shabbos 
before Pesach, so that they should have time to buy what they need. 
Although the practice of ma-oz chittin focuses first on the poor of one’s 
own town or community, some Jewish communities in some years have lived 
under restrictions of their governments as to how much matzah and other 
Pesach foods they may prepare. Soviet regulations, for example, have 
changed from year to year. Sometimes as much matzah as needed has been 
allowed; sometimes very little. Organizations for support of Soviet Jewry have 
sometimes sponsored the sending of large-scale supplies of matzah; or if even 
this has been prohibited, have urged American Jews to mail matzah to the 
Soviet Embassy as a protest. It would be wise, perhaps at the time of Shabbos 
Shekalim before Purim, to check with these organizations or with groups in 
touch with other oppressed Jewish communities to see what the situation is. 
At the beginning of Nisan in the second year of freedom for the 
Israelites in the wilderness, the Mishkan, the traveling Shrine for the Pres- 
ence of God, was dedicated. In memory of this event and in hope for the 
Messianic redemption when God’s Presence will again become palpable (and 


146 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
this time to all humanity), some very traditional Jewish communities spend 
the seven days at the end of Adar and the first thirteen days of Nisan in a 
special commemoration. On the seven last days of Adar, when Moses 
completed the Shrine of the Presence and offered up the dedicatory sacrifices, 
these communities pray for the great redemption. On the first 12 days of 
Nisan they read (not officially from a Torah scroll, but from a printed book, 
without a blessing) the 12 passages, one by one, about the gifts brought by 
the 12 tribes to the Shrine (Numbers 7:12-83); and on the thirteenth of 
Nisan, in honor of the priestly tribe of Levi, the passage on lighting the 
Menorah from Exodus 8:1—-5. The first day of Nisan is observed as a daylight 
fast in memory and mourning of the deaths of Nadav and Avihu, Aaron’s 
sons, on the very day they brought strange fire to offer at the dedication of 
the Shrine. Similarly, the tenth of Nisan is kept by the most observant as a 
fast day in memory of the death of Miriam. 
Beginning on the new moon of Nisan, it is also customary to start 
studying the Passover story—especially to review the Haggadah and various 
ancient and modern commentaries on it, with an eye to using it on Pesach 
night. In households and congregations where it is customary to use varia- 
tions on the Haggadah, Rosh Chodesh Nisan is a good time to begin 
gathering different Haggadahs and looking through them for passages that stir 
the mind and soul in one’s present stage in life. 
The two weeks between Rosh Chodesh and Pesach can be a time for 
serious exploration of the meaning of freedom, creativity, the birth and 
rebirth of identity. What mitzrayim, what tight spot, do I need to leave this 
year? What buds and sprouts of change do I see in myself and in the world 
around me? What questions do I need to ask? What tales do I need to tell? 
What songs do I need to sing? 
The Shabbos just before Pesach, Shabbos Hagadol (either The Great 
Shabbos or Shabbos of The Great) was traditionally a point at which these 
questions—seen, it is true, through the lens of the ancient texts—might be 
intensified. 
The Shabbos took its special name from the climactic lines about “the 
great and terrible day of the Lord,” Yom Adonai hagadol v’hanorah, from the 
haftarah assigned for that day replacing the regular haftarah connected with 
the ordinary Torah portion in the regular cycle of readings. The special 
haftarah is from the last chapter of Malachi, the last of the Prophets. It ends: 
For here! The day is coming that will burn like a furnace. All the 
proud, and all who do evil, will be stubble; and the day that is coming 
will set them ablaze, says the Lord of Hosts, so that it will leave them 
neither root nor branch. But for you who fear My name the sun of 
righteousness will rise with healing in its wings, and you shall go forth 
leaping joyfully like calves released from the stall. And you shall 


PESACH + 147 
trample upon the wicked, for they shall be ashes under the soles of your 
feet on the day that I make, says the Lord of Hosts. Remember the 
Teaching of Moses my servant, which | commanded him in Horeb for 
all Israel—rules and judgments. Here, | will send you Elijah the 
prophet before the coming of the great and terrible day of the Lord. 
And he will turn the hearts of parents to children and the hearts of 
children to parents—lest | come and smite the land with utter destruc- 
tion. 
This haftarah clearly connects the ultimate Redemption with the im- 
pending Passover—as if to remind us in advance that the point of Pesach is to 
look toward the coming of Elijah, in the Pesach that will redeem all the 
peoples from all the Pharaohs. And how, in that great and terrible day, will 
Elijah do the work of redemption? By turning the hearts of the generations 
toward each other. By infusing with love the questions of the children and 
the answers of the parents on Seder night. By making of the Pesach sacrificial 
lamb a true substitute for the death of the firstborn child, just as Elijah comes 
to the circumcision of a newborn son to make that ceremony, too, a 
substitute for death between the generations. 
And thus Shabbos Hagadol comes to remind us once more and in a new 
way that Pesach is the festival of birth, of generation, of creation—and of all 
the strains that emerge when the old gives birth to the new. 
In the afternoon service on Shabbos Hagadol, the part of the Pesach 
Hageadah that runs from ‘‘Avadim hayinu, slaves we were,” to the end of 
Dayenu, “to atone for all our sins,” is read in some synagogues to prepare for 
Pesach. It may replace the chanting of Psalm 104, or be added to it. 
THE SEDERTPREPFARALIONS 
The last burst of preparations focuses on the Seder itself. This is a 
symbolic, ritual meal that uses real foods to embody ideas—literally to make 
them part of the body. Seder means order. The order of the meal and of the 
story-telling that precedes it has been carefully worked and reworked over 
centuries and is laid out in the book called Haggadah or Telling. But this is 
an order that looks toward freedom, and there is a free play of discussion and 
action within the basic pattern. 
Since the Seder is built around a real meal, it is done around a dinner 
table with a plate of the symbolic foods upon it. Almost all Haggadahs 
describe how this Seder plate should be set, though few explain all the items: 
Pesach or zeroa (arm-outstretched-to-sow-seed) stands for the sacrificial 
lamb—now usually represented by a roast lamb shankbone; or a roast chicken 
neck or wing, among Jews whose tradition suggests avoiding any hint that the 
Temple sacrifices might still be valid; or a boiled beet, among vegetarians, in 


148 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
accord with a Talmudic suggestion of what foods might fulfill the command 
of eating two dishes. 
Why two dishes? One representing the Pesach sacrifice and the other 
representing the chagigah or festival sacrifice that was offered on all of the 
pilgrimage festivals, not only Pesach. The roast egg on the Seder plate came 
to represent the chagigah. 
On most Seder plates there are two forms of maror, the bitter herb: both 
a raw root of horseradish (to eat a slice separately from the matzah, but piled 
with charoset), and a dish of grated horseradish (to eat together with the 
matzah in memory of the Temple and in honor of Hillel, who urged that way 
of doing ir). 
There is also the mildly bitter green vegetable: parsley, lettuce, or 
celery, used for dipping in salt water at the beginning of the ritual. It is 
intended to foreshadow the bitter herb, and to trigger the children’s questions 
because the procedure is so odd. And it may carry a second level of symbolic 
meaning in that the greens in salt water may represent the spring element of 
Pesach—with the salt recalling the sea, mother of life. 
And there is the charoset, a paste or mixture of chopped nuts, apples or 
raisins, and wine, representing the mortar that the Israelite slaves used in 
laying bricks. The fact that charoset is so sweetly delicious may Tepresent a 
dialectical truth about slavery: slavery is bitter, but its orderliness and secure 
dependability can also become sweet to the slave. 
Among the other arrangements of the Seder are the following: 
* Participants (or at least the one who is acting as leader) wear the white 
robe or kittel that is otherwise worn only for Yom Kippur, one’s wedding, and 
one’s burial. Thus the sense of purity-in-renewal is asserted for this festival of 
new birth. 
* Salt water for dipping the greens at the start of the ritual and a hard-boiled egg at the start of the meal. 
> Three pieces of matzah, representing—depending on the commenta- 
tor—Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; the three castes of Cohanim (priests), 
Levites, and ordinary Israelites; the two joyful sacrifices of Pesach and chagigah, plus the bread of the oppressed; creation, revelation, and redemp- tion; the three aspects of life expressed in assertion (which requires one), tension (which requires two), and resolution (which requires three); and many other threads of meaning. 
* Enough wine to make up four cups for each participant—representing 
the four verbs of redemption in Exodus 6:6—7 (v’hotzeyti, v’hitzalti, v’ga-alti v'lakachi—lI will bring you out, I will deliver you, | will redeem you, I will espouse you). 
* A wine cup to fill for the expected visit of Elijah the Prophet. * Pillows to lean the left side on, especially when saying blessings over the wine and ritual food—as a symbol of freedom and relaxation. 


PESACH - 149 
@> THE SEDER «ee 
The Seder itself can be done in a more or a less ordered way, depending 
on the desires of each group of participants. Since all Haggadahs—traditional 
and experimental—lay out an order for the Seder, the most important task is 
to absorb how one or another Haggadah works and to decide how much 
openness you want. What seems most useful for us to do here is to sketch the 
basic structure and to mention different approaches that some people have 
used. For more detail, choose a Haggadah. 
The basic structure is (a) a series of preparatory steps; (b) an introduc- 
tion to the telling made up of an interplay of questions and partial answers; 
(c) the heart of the telling, a brief historical passage from Deuteronomy 
intertwined with a number of midrashic commentaries; (d) singing part of the 
Hallel psalms, praising God for past and future redemptions; (e) formally 
eating the ritual foods; (f) the regular meal, with songs; and (g) the post-meal 
recitation of grace after meals and the rest of the Hallel psalms, with several 
closing songs and rituals. 
In all of these sections it is possible to pause—to add some ceremonial 
acts; read some poems, stories, commentaries from Jewish tradition or from 
non-Jewish sources, or additional prayers; make new midrash by sharing 
reactions to what is going on; or add new songs. Time and hunger may turn 
out to be the chief problems involved in enriching the Seder in this way. The 
group might decide to take the edge off hunger by eating a light snack 
beforehand or even (unobtrusively) at some point in the service and discus- 
sion. 
The preparatory steps are lighting the festival candles; making the 
separation and hallowing of kiddush to bless the festival; washing the hands; 
eating the mildly bitter greens dipped in salt water; and breaking one matzah. 
The company might explore the meanings of this pattern. Does it evoke the 
process of the Creation, from the separation of light and dark to the breaking 
in two of Adam? Does it bring forth special memories of old Passovers? As an 
introduction and warm-up, a beginning for the festival of beginnings, what 
feelings does it arouse? 
The heart of the Seder is the telling, in accordance with the command, 
“You shall tell your child on that day, saying . . .”. Precisely the command 
to “Tell your child” directs the Seder in an intergenerational direction. The 
Haggadah examines the different approaches of four different kinds of chil- 
dren (or are all these different aspects of every person’s makeup?) and suggests 
four questions that the youngest put to all the grown-ups. The Talmud makes 
clear that these questions are only a suggestion; it tells the stories of several 
Seders in which other questions were asked, and because they opened up the 
story, replaced the Four Questions at those Seder tables. It is especially 
interesting to note that only two of the Four Questions receive explicit 


150 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
answers in the Haggadah—as if to say that the elders can never fully answer 
questions, or that the next generation must constantly work out new answers. 
After the questions and some partial answers, the Haggadah enters the 
heart of the telling. This is made up of reciting the verses of Deuteronomy 
26:5-8, a brief history of the Israelites’ entrance into and exodus from Egypt, 
together with a long and intertwined midrash or exegetical commentary on 
these verses. The passage in its original context is an unusual credo in the 
form of a history, a public statement to be made when bringing the yearly first 
fruits offering to the Temple. The statement is not the usual kind of credo in 
the sense of “I believe in the following general propositions about the world, 
my religion, and my self,” but instead is a statement of memory—a recapi- 
tulation of the history of the Israelite people in its relation with God. 
The Haggadah’s midrash on this passage pauses at many of the words of 
this mini-history, linking them with similar words elsewhere in the Bible and 
thus enriching the story. The midrash may also be making some philosophical 
points in arguments that were going on among the sages as the Haggadah was 
being shaped. For example, the midrashim could have been so chosen as to 
glorify Moses. Instead, he is referred to only once (and then in a casual way) 
in the whole Haggadah. Presumably the intention was to emphasize God’s 
leadership and de-emphasize the individual hero who might come almost to 
be worshipped. 
The next portion of the Seder is a powerful living-out of the fusion of 
physical and intellectual—through eating foods that have a strong content of 
ideas and emotions. Some Jewish communities have not waited till the eating 
to make this fusion, but have made the telling itself more physical, in the 
tradition of the vigor and haste of the departure from Egypt. Some Oriental 
Jews get up from the table, put matzahs on their left shoulders, and with 
sandals on their feet and staves in their hands march around the table and 
into other rooms or even into the street—re-enacting the Exodus. Others act 
out a mini-play in which a dusty, exhausted traveler hammers on the door 
and is finally let in to describe how things were going in Jerusalem and how 
close the coming of Messiah seems. Some American Seders have included 
playlets on the ten different plagues, improvised dances expressing the feel- 
ings of the Four Children and of the different verses of dayenu, and mime 
representing the inner essences of the matzah, the bitter herb, the wine, the 
charoset. 
The section in which the ritual foods are shared begins with a formal 
hand-washing and goes on with matzah, maror (bitter herb), and charoset. It includes pointing out the shankbone or its substitute without eating or even lifting it—lest it be thought the sacrifices are still in force without the Temple. Between the ritual foods and the regular meal there is in many households a strange moment that has the quality of both: the eating of a hard-boiled egg sliced in old salt water. The character and wide usage of this 


PESACH + 15] 
soup marks it as a ritual; yet there is no special explanation or blessing, and it 
is treated as the first course of the meal, before the real soup with matzah 
balls. The egg in salt water would seem to be a symbol of birth and fertility— 
celebrated but not discussed. 
PRAYER AND TORAH-READING 
The first day of Pesach is a holiday on which, traditionally, no work is 
done. Before the morning amidah a hymn is sung: “B’rakh Dodi. . . , Flee,” 
or “Hasten, my Beloved,” a phrase from the last verse of the Song of Songs. 
Here it is addressed to God. There are three separate hymns by different poets 
under this title. One of them is sung on the first day, one on the second day 
of Pesach, and one on the Shabbos in the middle of Pesach. Each of them 
looks forward to the Messianic redemption, and each ends, “For the sake of 
the forebears, please save the children and bring redemption to their chil- 
dren’s children. Blessed are You, Lord, Who redeems Israel.” 
In the amidah itself, the same festival paragraph used for Sukkot is 
inserted, except that the festival is given the special name ““Chag Hamatzor, 
z’man Cherutenu, Festival of Unleavened Bread, the season of our libera- 
tion.” After the amidah, all of Hallel is recited on the first day as it is on 
Sukkot. 
The Torah readings of the first day of Pesach are made up of Exodus 
12:21-51 and Numbers 28:16—25. These are, respectively, the passage that 
intertwines the story of the Passover night of Exodus with the command for 
future celebrations of Pesach; and the recitation of the sacrifices required for 
the seven days of Pesach while the Temple stood. 
The haftarah for the first day is from Joshua 5:7-6:1, plus 6:27. In it, 
after having just led the Israelites across the Jordan River into the Promised 
Land, Joshua arranges the circumcision of all the Israelite males—for all who 
had been born in the wilderness during the forty years after the Exodus from 
Egypt had remained uncircumcised. He did this just in time to celebrate 
Pesach—evidently for the first time since the Exodus, since only circumcised 
men could take part in Pesach. When the people ate unleavened bread, the 
manna which had fed them since the Exodus stopped falling, and from then 
on they ate of the grain of the land of Canaan. 
In the first blessing of the amidah in the musaf or additional service on 
the first day of Pesach, there is inserted a prayer for God to begin sending 
dew. This prayer marks the turning of the seasons in the Land of Israel. With 
Pesach begin the six months of the year in which there is almost never any 
rain; so the prayers for rain end. But some continuing moisture is essential to 
keep the land fertile, and so the rabbis decided to ask God for dew. The 
phrase “mashiv haruach u’morid hageshem, Who makes the wind blow and 
the rain fall,” is simply dropped by Ashkenazic Jews from Pesach to Sh’mini 


152 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Atzeret, and among Sephardim is replaced with the phrase “u-morid hatal, 
Who makes the dew fall.” One of the great liturgical poets, Eleazar Kalir, 
wrote a hymn that is used on the first day of Pesach in most congregations. Its 
last stanza: 
Give dew, precious dew, that we our harvest reap, 
And guard our fatted flocks and herds from leanness! 
Behold our people follows Thee like sheep, 
And looks to Thee to give the earth her greenness, With dew. 
In the Land of Israel and among Reform Jews, as with all the other 
festivals (except Rosh Hashanah) there is celebrated only one first day of 
Pesach. Among non-Reform Jews of the Diaspora, two first days of festival 
are celebrated. On the second night of Pesach, therefore, there is a second 
Seder. Some households have developed ways of making the two experiences 
quite different: for instance, one in a family or small group of friends, the 
other in a larger communal setting; one indoors, the other outside—even as 
the culmination of a hike; one with a traditional Haggadah, one with a new 
one; one focused on political liberation, one on spring. It is on the second 
night of Pesach that the Counting of the omer begins, which we will deal 
with in the next chapter. 
On the morning of the second day of Pesach, congregations that recog- 
nize it as a festival day’ chant again a full Hallel, the psalms of praise from 
Psalm 113 to 118. From the Torah they read Leviticus from 22:26-23:44, and 
the same passage from Numbers as on the day before. The Leviticus passage 
contains the cycle of all the festivals of the year. The haftarah for the second 
day, II Kings 23:1—9 and 23:21-25, describes the efforts of King Josiah in the 
seventh century B.C.E. to cleanse the whole land and people of idolatrous 
practices and symbols—some of which had even been introduced into the 
Temple itself. Then Josiah called upon the people to make pilgrimage to 
Jerusalem to keep Pesach according to all the laws laid out in a book of Torah 
that had just been discovered (probably Deuteronomy). The people assem- 
bled in multitudes to keep such a Pesach as there had not been in all the days 
of the judges and the kings before. 
With the end of the second day of Pesach, the intermediate days of chol hamoed (ordinary part of the festival) begin. In the morning service, only 
parts of Hallel, the psalms of praise, are chanted (omitting Psalms 115 and 116). We do this because on the seventh day of Pesach the Egyptian army was drowned in the Red Sea. According to the rabbis, when the angels began to sing for joy, God rebuked them: “Are not these also the work of My 
“See Appendix I on the second day of festivals. 


PESACH - 153 
hands?” So in accord with God’s desire we reduce our joy—so that we should 
express no pleasure over death, even the death of our enemies. 
The obligation to eat no chametz continues through the rest of Pesach. 
Traditional Jews avoid strenuous or demeaning work during the whole week 
of Pesach; but cooking or other work for thé holidays, and crucial business 
whose neglect would mean substantial losses, may be carried on. Most Jews 
now continue at their work during the week, but with a festive air. 
On the Shabbos that comes in the middle of Pesach, the tradition 
teaches that the Song of Songs should be read before the Torah reading. The 
Song is a flowing set of interwoven love poems, some of them rich in erotic 
imagery and imagery of springtime. There was an argument among the rabbis 
over whether it should be preserved as part of the Bible at all—an argument 
resolved by Akiba’s insistence that “All the writings are holy, but the Song of 
Songs is the holy of holies.” 
Why did the rabbis assign the reading of the Song to Pesach? 
- The traditional understanding of the song is that it is about the love 
between God and Israel—a love poem especially appropriate at Pesach, 
which might be viewed as the onset of the love affair that culminates fifty 
days later at the Marriage between God and Israel at Sinai. 
- Rabbinic and Kabbalistic midrash on the Song saw in it many specific 
metaphorical references to the night of watching, hope, and dread, just 
before the Exodus from Egypt; to the Exodus itself; and to the sojourn in the 
wilderness. 
- The themes of spring and sexuality in the Song go well with Pesach as 
a festival of spring and birth. 
- In the Song, God’s name is never mentioned, and the spiritual life is 
one of flow, spontaneity, openness, and process—God as Inner. It thus 
complements the spirituality of the Haggadah, which is based on God as 
Other and on the rhythm set by clock and calendar. Perhaps both spiritual 
modes must be experienced and integrated if Messiah is to come—and if 
Pesach is to teach toward the Messianic redemption, then Pesach must hold 
and share both modes of being. 
The Torah readings for Shabbos Chol Hamoed Pesach are from Exodus 
33:12-34:26 and Numbers 28:19-25. The former describes Moses’ seeking 
out and achieving a close and loving knowledge of God’s loving-kindness, 
and hearing as a friend God’s pattern of Pesach in the pilgrim festivals. The 
latter details the burnt-offerings for Pesach. 
The haftarah is the extraordinary chapter of Ezekiel 37, in which Ezekiel 
experiences the valley of dry bones—the dead and hopeless house of Israel. 
God promises to breathe life and hope into the bones, to restore full vigor and 
spirit to the people, and to return them to their land. By placing this passage 
as a Pesach reading, the rabbis reasserted the connection between the 
redemption of the past and the redemption of the future. 


154 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
According to tradition, the seventh day of Pesach is the day on which 
Pharaoh's chariots overtook the Israelites at the Reed Sea, and were plunged 
into the sea while Israel marched through it on dry land. In commemoration 
of the event, the seventh day (and eighth, for non-Reform Jews in the 
Diaspora) is a full holiday when work is forbidden and the people reassemble 
for a holy convocation. The morning service for the seventh day includes a 
hymn to be sung just before the amidah—Yom L’Yabasha. It is by Yehuda 
Halevi, perhaps the greatest of the Spanish-Jewish poets (twelfth century). It 
begins by celebrating the salvation of Israel at the Reed Sea, and then looks 
forward to the future great redemption with the refrain, “Shira chadash 
shibchu g’eulim, Then a new song sang Your redeemed throng.” The Torah 
portion (from Exodus 13:17-15:26) also focuses on the encounter at the Sea. 
It includes the song of triumph Miriam, Moses, and the people sang. The 
haftarah underlines the theme of victorious song. It is made up of David's 
chant of triumph at his delivery from danger at the hand of King Saul: “The 
Lord is my rock and my fortress!” 
On the eighth day, the Torah portion (Deuteronomy 14:22-16:17 if the 
eighth day is also Shabbos; if not, Deuteronomy 15:19-16:17) focuses on the 
command to celebrate Pesach in the context of the other festivals. The 
haftarah (Isaiah 10:32-12:6) again looks to the future: 
And the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down 
with the kid, and the calf and young lion and fatling together, and a 
little child shall lead them. . . . None shall hurt or destroy in all My 
holy mountain, for the earth shall be full of intimacy with the Lord as 
the waters fill the sea. 
It is on the eighth day that the community remembers its dead in the yizkor 
service. 
COMPLETION 
After nightfall ends the eighth day of Pesach, there is a havdalah (separation) ceremony—a truncated version of the havdalah that ends Shab- bos. The paragraph before the wine and the blessings of spices and fire are omitted (unless the eighth day is also Shabbos): 
Baruch atah Adonai elohenu melech ha-olam borey p’ri hagafen. 
Blessed Are You, Lord our God, ruler of space and time, Who creates the fruit of the vine. 
(Drink the wine.) 
Baruch etah Adonai elohenu melech ha-olam hamavdil beyn kodesh 


PESACH = 155 
I’chol, beyn ohr |’choshech, beyn Yisrael l’amim, beyn yom hashvi’i 
l’sheshet y’mey hama-aseh. Baruch atah Adonai hamavdil beyn kodesh 
I’chol. 
Blessed are You, Lord our God, ruler of space and time, who distin- 
guishes between holy and ordinary, between light and darkness, be- 
tween Israel and the other peoples, between the seventh day and the 
six work days. Blessed are You, Lord Our God, Who distinguishes 
between holy and ordinary. 
In many households, people will then go out together to buy and eat 
some chametz: ice cream perhaps, or a specially well-baked bread, or beer and 
pizza. 
The custom of a chametz party has been brought to its highest level by 
the Jews of North Africa, who hold a great celebration called Maimunu on 
the evening and day after Pesach. That day is believed to be the yahrtzeit 
(death-anniversary) of Maimon ben Joseph, the father of Rambam or Maimo- 
nides, one of the greatest of the rabbinic commentators and codifiers. 
Maimon was himself a leading scholar of his generation, lived in the Moroc- 
can city of Fez, and died about 1170. Much of his work focused on Islamic— 
Jewish relations; it both took Islam seriously as a monotheistic religion, and 
offered Jews who had been forcibly converted to Islam ways of continuing 
their adherence to Torah. His work was therefore of great significance to Jews 
living in Muslim countries—which may help explain the fact and the name 
of the celebration on his yahrtzeit. 
Maimuna itself begins with an evening meal of dairy foods symbolic of 
birth and fertility—milk, figs, ears of wheat, and pancakes with butter and 
honey. Often a live fish, swimming in a bowl, is on the table, along with a 
bowl of flour in which golden rings are hidden. There is a great bustle of 
visiting and sharing foods from one household to another. On the following 
day there are large picnics at beaches, fields, and cemeteries. In Israel, Jews of 
North African background carry on the Maimuna tradition, including a large 
get-together in Jerusalem. 
@> NEW APPROACHES €€e® 
For centuries or millennia, three major themes have been interwoven in 
Pesach: the birth of a people into political freedom; the rebirth of the earth 
into springtime life; and spiritual rebirth of the individual (especially in the 
symbolism based on removal of chametz). All these, of course, continue to be 
profoundly important. In our own generation, the Pesach story might also 
serve as a framework to deal with a new birth that embodies some elements of 


156 » SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
all these three. That is the emergence of new forms in the relationships 
between women and men. 
There are two main elements of Pesach tradition that might lead us in 
that direction: the story of the first stages of the birth of freedom, in the first 
four chapters of Exodus; and the Song of Songs. To this generation, the issues 
of the freedom of women and the place of women in the struggles for 
universal freedom are important. To such a generation, rereading the first 
four chapters of Exodus opens up some unexpected possibilities. 
Those chapters keep asserting the importance of women and their 
experience of childbirth as the guide to freedom. First there are the mid- 
wives—who are the first to resist Pharaoh’s decree that all the Israelite 
newborn boys be murdered. They obey God, not Pharaoh—even though they 
have never heard God’s voice. They do not need to hear the Voice, because 
they hear it in the cry of each new baby. It is the voice of newness, 
unpredictability, creativity, the voice of “I will become who I will become,” 
the Name that God’s Own Self later adopts at the burning bush. Even more 
than mothers, they understood childbirth—because they had mothered so 
many births, so many mothers. And from giving birth to children, they learn 
to give birth to freedom. For the newborn carries at the biological level the 
same message that freedom carries at the historical-political level: it is 
possible to start over. It is possible for there to be possibility. 
In Exodus, the women keep on teaching the lesson. Pharaoh’s daughter 
and Miriam conspire to save the life of a baby boy by giving him a second 
birth from the waters of the Nile—and he grows up to be Moses. But even 
Moses must receive more education from women before he can become the 
liberator. His first clumsy efforts at liberation only send him bursting forth 
from Egypt like tumultuously sown seed. He settles among seven women at a 
well (a symbol of the womb), marries one of them, has a child—and only then 
can meet God at the burning bush and hear the Voice and Name of freedom. 
Even this is not enough: on the journey back to Egypt, Moses—in danger of 
death—has to learn from his wife Tzipporah how to fulfill the birth of his son 
by renewing the covenant of circumcision. Not till then can he take on the 
task he has been assigned. 
So these chapters teach us that women—and the quintessentially female process, giving birth to children—were crucial to the Liberation from Egypt. 
Even the liberation itsel{—out of mitzrayim, the tight spot, across the broken 
waters of the Reed Sea—was a birth, or a conception in the first stages of what became a birth on crossing Jordan. Torah shows us that the process cannot be fulfilled until men are also part of it. But it is the women who first understand the path, because they bring to it something unique in their own 
life-experience. 


PESACH + 157 
@>> FOODS «eee 
Perhaps the most thoroughly explored of all the aspects of Jewish food is 
that of how to cook for Pesach. In addition to some traditional recipes, we are 
making some available in one unexplored area. In the last decade the number 
of Jews who are vegetarians has grown considerably—and vegetarians who 
want to keep kosher for Pesach and who adhere to the special Ashkenazic 
prohibition on rice, peas, and beans find themselves in an unusually difficult 
position. Where do you find protein if meat, fish, and most of the grains and 
lentils can’t be used? 
Rose Sue Berstein, an Ashkenazic vegetarian who is a member of the 
chavurah-style group Fabrangen in Washington, DC, has collected a number 
of recipes for foods that are high in protein, low in cholesterol and calories, 
and fulfill both Jewish and vegetarian obligations. 
STUFFED EGGPLANT 
For each two servings, use 1 medium (approx. | lb.) eggplant, 1 small green 
pepper, 1 medium onion, 6-8 large mushrooms and 4 02. Kosher-for- Passover 
Cheddar cheese, grated. Slice eggplant lengthwise. Carefully scoop out 
inside, leaving shells intact. Chop into small cubes. Saute—using as little oil 
as possible—eggplant with sliced green pepper, onion and mushrooms until 
soft. Season with basil and ground black pepper. Fill eggplant cavities with 
this mixture, place in oiled baking dish and bake at 350° for 15 minutes. 
Then top each eggplant half with grated cheese and return to oven until 
cheese melts, about 10 minutes. 
ZUCCHINI SOUP 
Use approx. 1% Ibs. zucchini, sliced in % inch rounds. Saute the zucchini 
with 1 sliced onion, then pass through food mill or puree in blender, but 
reserve several slices for garnishing. Stir pureed zucchini into 4 cups milk 
over low heat. When thoroughly blended continue cooking over medium 
heat, for about 15 minutes, but do not bring to boil. Season to taste with salt, 
pepper and chives. Garnish with remaining zucchini slices. Can be served 
hot or cold; if served cold, add a spoonful of yoghurt or sour cream. 


158 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
STUFFED PEPPERS 
For four green peppers use 8 oz. farmer cheese, 2 eggs, 4 tablespoons chopped 
green onions, 1 teaspoon rosemary, salt and pepper as desired. Hollow out 
peppers, and fill with cheese mix. Then sprinkle grated cheddar cheese on 
top of each one, (use 2-3 oz. altogether) and top with sliced almonds. Place 
in oiled baking dish and bake at 350° approx. 30 minutes. 
BRUSSELS SPROUTS CASSEROLE 
1¥%2 Ibs. brussels sprouts 5 medium tomatoes 
1 medium onion 1 cup grated cheddar (can substitute) butter cheese 
Saute sliced onion in butter until transparent. Scald, peel and slice tomatoes. 
Arrange brussels sprouts in casserole with onions and tomatoes. Add up to '% cup water, then cover and bake at 325° for 45 minutes. When brussels sprouts 
are tender, sprinkle with grated cheese and place under broiler to brown. 4 
servings. 
RED CABBAGE WITH APPLES 
1 red cabbage Yy teaspoon salt 1 medium onion 1 tsp. cinnamon Ys cup lemon juice (opt. 6 caraway seeds, 6 cloves, 4 Y4 cup honey whole allspice, 2 bay leaves) 2 apples 3 tablespoons oil or margarine handful raisins Y, cup water 
Gently saute sliced onion in oil, then add water, lemon juice, honey, and flavorings. Mix well, then add finely sliced or grated cabbage. Cover and cook over medium heat about 15 minutes, then add sliced apples and raisins. Continue to simmer about 10 minutes longer. Tart apples work best, and if you wish, you can tie the spices in cheesecloth for easy removal. 6 servings. 


PESACH + ]59 
LEEK SOUP 
2 large leeks 1% cup milk 
4 tablespoons butter salt 
1 large potato pepper 
Wash leeks well, slice, and saute in butter, but don’t brown them. Peel and 
slice the potato very finely, add to the leeks and cook very slowly, stirring 
gently until soft. Add milk, salt and pepper. Force through a sieve, return to 
saucepan and serve warm. 4 servings. 
POTATO CAULIFLOWER SOUP 
1 cooked cauliflower 2 tablespoons butter 
3 cooked and cubed potatoes 1% teaspoons salt 
4 cups milk ¥%, cup minced onion 
Heat milk in a large saucepan, add water in which you cooked the vegetables, 
stir in butter and salt. Sieve cauliflower and potatoes in small quantities and 
return to saucepan when smooth enough for your taste. (If you can use a 
blender this is much easier—be sure to put enough liquid in with each batch 
of vegetables). Simmer while you add the onion. Optional vegetables for 
additions include diced celery, carrots, fresh chives, and/or parsley. 2 quarts. 
Some more traditional Pesach recipes, from Hannah Waskow and Rose 
Gertz: 
MATZAH MEAL PANCAKES (LATKES) 
Y, cup matzah meal Y%, cup cold water 
¥%, teaspoon salt 3 eggs 
1 tablespoon sugar 


160 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Combine matzah meal, salt, and sugar. Separate the eggs. Beat yolks slightly 
and combine with the water. Add the liquids to the dry ingredients. Allow to 
stand for ¥2 hour. (May be mixed this far the night before and kept in the 
refrigerator to save time the next morning.) Beat the egg whites until stiff. 
Fold into the matzah meal mixture. Drop by tablespoon onto a hot, well- 
greased frying pan or griddle and brown on both sides. Makes 10 to 12 latkes. 
Serve with cinnamon and sugar, sour cream, apple sauce, or syrup. 
MATZAH BALLS 
2 tablespoons fat 1 teaspoon salt 
2 eggs slightly beaten 2 tablespoons soup stock or water 
Y, cup matzah meal 
Mix fat and eggs together. Add matzah meal and salt which were first mixed 
together. When well blended, add soup stock or water. Cover mixing bowl 
and place in refrigerator for at least twenty minutes. (May be refrigerated 
until convenient to cook.) Using a two or three quart pot, bring salted water 
to a brisk boil. Reduce flame and into the slightly bubbling water drop balls 
formed from above mixture. (About the size of walnuts.) Cover pot and cook 
40-60 minutes. Cut one matzah ball in half. If center is solid, return to pot 
and cook an additional 10 minutes. Have soup at room temperature, or 
warmer, and remove matzah balls from water to soup pot. When ready to 
serve allow soup to simmer for a few minutes. Will make eight to twelve balls. 
Packing these balls in 4’s or 5’s they may be frozen. To thaw, heat in small 
amount of boiling water and then transfer to soup. Very good in pea soup or 
noodle soup during the year. This recipe may be doubled with slight decrease 
in salt. 
UNLEAVENED BAGEL 
1 cup water 1 tablespoon sugar 
Ys cup chicken or vegetable fat or 4 eggs 
margarine Y teaspoon salt 
1 cup matzah meal (full) 


PESACH + 161 
Bring to a boil fat, water, sugar, and salt. Then stir in matzah meal, boil a 
second more, and remove from fire. Mix thoroughly, and when cooled a 
little, beat in eggs one at a time. Grease or wet hands and roll dough into 
balls of about 2 inches diameter. Place on greased sheet, then dip forefinger 
in water and press a hole in center of each ball or omit and use as rolls. Bake 
at 425° for 20 minutes and at 375° for 25 minutes. They should sound hollow. 
Let cool in stove with door ajar. 
SPONGE CAKE 
7 eggs juice of lemon 
1% cups sugar—sifted 1 cup (light) potato 
Grated rind of 1 lemon starch, sifted twice 
dash of salt 
Separate 6 eggs. Beat 6 yolks and one whole egg together with rotary egg 
beater until frothy. Gradually add 1 cup of sifted sugar, lemon juice, and 
grated lemon rind until thick and well mixed. Beat the 6 egg whites until stiff 
and add the rest of the sugar gradually. Mix potato starch and salt and add to 
egg yolk mixture. Fold in beaten egg whites. Finely cut nuts may be added to 
batter or sprinkled on top. 
Pour mixture into ungreased 10 inch tube pan. Bake 350° 45-50 minutes. 
Turn over on funnel until cold. Remove from pan by sliding a knife gently up 
and down between cake and pan to loosen. 
UNLEAVENED MEAT AND POTATO KNISHES 
3 cups mashed potatoes (regular or instant) 
1 beaten egg 
Yy teaspoon salt 
5 tablespoons fat (chicken or margarine or combination) 
Enough hot water (about 2 cup) to make a loose mixture. Add matzah meal 
to make a dough that can be shaped into biscuit-like form. (Wet hands before 
handling dough. ) 


162 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
FILLING 
If gribenes (cracklings resulting from rendering chicken fat) are available, use. 
If not, sautee: 
large onion Y lb. ground meat 
garlic clove Y |b. liver (chicken or beef) 
Grind gribenes and meat mixture (or sauteed onion and meat). Add: 
beaten egg Y, cup mashed potatoes 
salt dash of oregano 
pepper pinch of sugar 
parsley flakes 
Taste. May need a little more fat. Should have a smooth, velvety well- 
seasoned taste. 
Wet hands, form patty of potato dough, hollow center, insert a walnut-size 
piece of meat mixture and form dough over meat. Put on greased pan 2 inches 
apart. Lightly grease top. Bake about 2 hr., 400° or until light brown and 
crusty. Any left over filling may be frozen. Will make 12-15 knishes, 
depending on size. 
GRIBENES 
2 cups fat and skin of chicken, duck or goose cut into small pieces. Melt in 
large heavy saucepan over medium low heat until almost completely ren- 
dered. Add 1 large diced onion and cook until onion is golden brown. (When 
adding onion be careful because the fat boils up and may catch on fire.) Cool 
and strain. Refrigerate fat. Freeze gribenes for later use. 
@>> GO AND STUDY «ee 
Haggadahs multiply. For me the most useful have been Nahum Glatzer 
and E. D. Goldschmidt, The Passover Haggadah (Schocken); Michael Strass- 
feld, A Passover Haggadah (Rabbinical Assembly); Central Conference of 
American Rabbis, with Leonard Baskin, A Passover Haggadah (CCAR); 
Haggadah for a Secular Celebration of Pesach (Sholom Aleichem Club of 
Philadelphia, 443 E. Wadsworth Ave., Philadelphia, PA); Pesach Haggada 
(Hashomer Hatzair, available through Americans for Progressive Israel, 
NYC); Haggadah for a Crocus Festival (Martin Buber Institute, Sebastopol, 
CA); Aviva Cantor, ed., A Jewish Women's Haggada, available from Lilith 
Magazine, NYC; and my own The Freedom Seder (Holt, Rinehart & Winston) 
and The Shalom Seders, compiled by New Jewish Agenda (Adama Books, New York, 1984), three unconventional Haggadot focused on peacemaking. 


PESACH + 163 
See also Marcia Falk’s translation of The Song of Songs (Harper & Row, 
San Francisco) as well as the one in Five Megillot and Jonah (Jewish Publ. 
Soc.). And see Ruth Gruber Fredman, The Passover Seder: Afikoman in Exile 
(Univ. of Pennsylvania), and Irving Greenberg’s Guide to Passover (National 
Jewish Resource Center, NYC). 
See also Roberta Kalechofsky, Haggadah for the Liberated Lamb, to affirm 
Jewish vegetarianism and to use for a vegetarian Seder (Micah Publications, 
255 Humphrey St., Marblehead, MA 01945); a videotaped Seder called “In 
This Generation” with special appearances by Carl Sagan and Elie Wiesel, 
dealing with ethical responsibilities in the nuclear age (The Shalom Center, 
7318 Germantown Ave., Philadelphia, PA 19119); and two inserts for the 
Haggadah available from the Institute for Jewish Renewal (7318 Germantown 
Ave., Philadelphia, PA 19119): “The Ultimate Pharaoh” and “Four More 
Questions.” 


IN 
OMER CALENDAR 
The first 49-day period is remembered by the representation of the seventy: palms and twelve springs of water which the Jews encountered at Elim. (Exodus 15:27) 


Ke> CHAPTER TEN «eg 
TREK THROUGH 
ANXIETY AND 
HOPE—COUNTING 
THE OMER 
See weeks of seven days. Day by day, week by week, the community 
watches the spring grain grow, watches with hope and with anxiety. Day by 
day, week by week, the community moves forward from the moment of 
freedom’s first explosion—moves forward with hope and with anxiety. Will 
the earth succeed in unfolding its fruitfulness? Will we succeed in finding rest 
and new truth in our freedom? 
Day by day, week by week, the community counts the days of growing 
grain—and through them counts the unfolding of the earth and of our own 
potential. Day by day, week by week; for this is no holy day, not even a 
week-long festival—but truly a season of the year. A season full of hope, full 
of anxiety that hope may fail. 
@> ORIGINS «ee 
The most ancient level of the counting of the omer is that the counting 
linked two moments of harvest, moments on which depended the prosperity 
of the year. In the Torah, the dating of these moments was imprecise—for it 
depended on the ripening of the grain. Barley is the quickest ripening grain 
and the most fertile—and so it was the quintessence of the fruitfulness of the 
land. The barley crop came to ripeness early in the spring—during or just 
after Pesach. Late in the spring—fifty days later—the wheat crop was ready. 
So the Torah prescribed the waving of the omer (that is, a sheaf of 
barley) at the beginning of this period, “the time the sickle is first put to the 
en OD) 


166 +* SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
standing grain” (Lev. 23:10-11; Deut. 16:9). Then seven full weeks were to 
be counted off, and on the fiftieth day, two loaves of wheat bread were to be 
waved as an offering. The fiftieth day was celebrated as the Festival of Weeks 
(Shavuot), celebrating the completion of the weeks of anxiety and hope. 
The relationship between Pesach and Shavuot—and therefore the na- 
ture of these 49 days that connected them—became a matter of intense 
struggle between the priestly and rabbinic factions of Jewish leadership during 
the last two centuries before the destruction of the Temple. One passage of 
the Torah says that the counting of the 49 days should start when the sickle is 
put to the standing grain (Deut. 16:9); another, on the day after Shabbat 
(Lev. 23:11). The one date was indeterminate; the other, unclear. The 
priestly faction, the Sadducees, insisted the Shabbat in question was the 
Shabbos during Pesach. The Pharisees, forerunners of the rabbis, insisted 
that in this context Shabbat meant day of rest, not literally Shabbos, and 
that the day of rest intended was the festival day of the first day of Pesach. So 
they began the counting on the night beginning the second day of Pesach, 
and waved the omer of barley on the second day of Pesach. 
According to the Mishnah, when the Temple still stood, the cutting of the omer of barley for the wave-offering would proceed this way: 
How was it made ready? The messengers of the court used to go out on 
the eve of the Festival day and tie the grain in bunches while it was yet unreaped to make it the easier to reap; and the towns near by all 
assembled there together that it might be reaped with much pomp. 
When it grew dark he called out, “Is the sun set?” and they answered, “Yea!” “Is the sun set?” and they answered, “Yea!” “Is this a sickle?” 
and they answered, “Yea!” “Is this a sickle?” and they answered, “Yea!” “Is this a basket?” and they answered, “Yea!” “Is this a basket?” and they answered, “Yea!” On the Sabbath he called out, “On this Sab- bath?” and they answered, “Yea!” “On this Sabbath?” and they answered, “Yea!” “Shall I reap?” and they answered, “Reap!” “Shall I reap?” and they answered, “Reap!” He used to call out three times for every matter, and they answered, “Yea!” “Yea!” “Yea!” Wherefore was all this? Because of the Boethuseans who used to say: the omer may not be reaped at the close of a Festival day. 
The Boethuseans were the priestly faction, the Sadducees under another name. The Mishnah is the record written by the rabbis. It is making a deliberate public statement that if the second day of Pesach happened to be a Shabbos, they reaped the omer even on Shabbos—when cutting grain would ordinarily be utterly forbidden—and did not reserve the reaping for the day after Shabbos as the Sadducees wished. 
The Mishnah continues: 


COUNTING THE OMER - 167 
They reaped it, put it into the baskets, and brought it to the Temple 
Court. They used to parch it with fire to fulfill the ordinance that it 
should be parched with fire. So R. Meir. But the Sages say: They used 
to beat it with reeds and the stems of plants that the grains should not 
be crushed; then they put it into a hollow tube wherein were holes so 
that the fire might prevail over all of it. They put it in a grist mill and 
took therefrom a Tenth (of an ephah of flour) which was sifted through 
thirteen sieves. The priest then waved the omer in the six directions of 
the world: east, south, west, north, up, and down. 
The struggle between the priests and the forerunners of the rabbis over 
when to start the countdown toward Shavuot may have been much more 
important than a battle over dates. For it was probably connected with the 
rabbinic assertion that Shavuot was not only the Festival of First Fruits, as the 
Torah calls it, but also the Festival of the Giving of the Torah. To assert this, 
the rabbis had to show that the date of Shavuot was the date of the revelation 
of the Torah at Mount Sinai. The written Torah never says this; it leaves 
unclear both the date of Shavuot and the date of Sinai. (In Chapter XI we 
will examine this struggle over the dates of the omer, Shavuot, and Sinai in 
more detail.) 
Once the rabbis identified the two moments—the moment of celebrat- 
ing the wheat harvest and the moment of receiving the Torah—they gave a 
new significance to the period of the 49 days. The period then became the 
time of ascent from political liberation to spiritual revelation—the period in 
which the newly free people move toward a new devotion, a new service and 
servitude to the God of freedom. Taken in this sense, the counting became 
relevant to the city-dwellers who were the Pharisees’ constituency and for 
whom the spring harvesting may have become a distant, not highly signifi- 
cant process. 
With the destruction of the Temple, the Pharisees and rabbis won. The 
importance of the priesthood shrank once the sacrifices became impossible. 
And with the waving of the omer and of the wheat bread gone as well, the 
sense of the period of the 49 days as a spiritual journey grew much stronger. 
The rabbis decided that the counting of the 49 days should continue 
even after the wave-offerings had been prevented by the destruction of the 
Temple. Sometime during the next seven centuries, the 49 days took on the 
tone of a limited, moderate mourning. Except for the two new moons that 
come during the 49 days—Rosh Chodesh for the months of Iyar and Sivan— 
and for the day of Lag B’Omer—the 33d day of the omer—it was prohibited to 
have weddings or to play musical instruments or to get haircuts. When and 
why this tone of mourning was adopted is not clear. Some hypotheses: 
- It may have been part of the observance from its early days, as a way of 
acting out the anxiety that pervaded the grain-growing season and the march 


168 +: SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
from Egypt to Mount Sinai. On this hypothesis, Lag B’Omer was the relaxa- 
tion of this tension in midstream, a sigh of relief that the people heaved 
before taking up the tension again. It is analogous to the ancient May Day 
celebrations in many European cultures. 
* It may have grown up only after the Destruction of the Temple, out of 
mourning for the Temple and for the impossibility of waving the barley and 
the wheat bread there. 
* It may have grown up still later, out of a deadly epidemic that befell 
the rabbinical students of Rabbi Akiba in the second century C.E.—a plague 
that began with the omer and paused or ended on the 33d day. Alternatively, 
the Talmud’s reference to the death of Akiba’s students may have been a 
code-word reference to Akiba’s soldiers. These were the soldiers of Bar 
Kochba’s revolt against Rome, which Akiba supported. Perhaps many of 
them died in a terrible defeat during the omer period; but perhaps some of 
them escaped or the battle ebbed on the 33d day. 
* It may have been borrowed from a spring mourning period of the 
Romans, during which the souls of the dead were thought to wander on earth 
and marriages were avoided. 
Some of these hypotheses, of course, may overlap. Thus a profound 
sense of anxiety and hope during the spring growing season may have been at 
the root of a Roman spring mourning period as well as at the root of the 
Jewish counting of the omer. When the Jews discovered and felt the similar- 
ities, they may have borrowed some of the practices that others used to 
express their feelings. And suppose that one or several stretched-out calami- 
ties befell the Jews at approximately the same season, like a plague or a bloody but indecisive battle. Their anxiety may have accentuated and be- come identified with that of the omer season. 
As the connection of the omer with agriculture grew more remote, the sense of the period as one of spiritual growth toward receiving Torah grew stronger. As the saying goes, “It was relatively easy to get the Jews out of slavery—but not so easy to get slavery out of the Jews.” In this atmosphere, the omer became a time of self-scrutiny and spiritual self-improvement. 
Among the Kabbalists and the Chassidim who followed their approach, the omer period became identified as a season for strengthening the virtues intimated by the seven S’phirot, emanations or aspects of God, which had a direct effect upon the world. 
By the time these ideas get further refined in the Zohar [the great Jewish mystical text, written in the thirteenth century] we are dealing with a movement from the 49 Gates of Defilement [in mitzrayim] through the Gates of Understanding [toward Sinai]. Since we have to count 7 times 7 weeks, the number is not accidental. There is a pattern in which 7 times 7 produces both cosmic and personal significance. The Kabbalists taught us that the seven weeks represent the periods in 


COUNTING THE OMER - 169 
which one or another of the Seven Holy Attributes represented by the 
seven names not-to-be-erased appear in 49 different combinations. The 
attributes are listed in the following order: Chesed (Loving-kindness). 
Gevurah (Severity), Tiferet (Beauty), Netzach (Victory), Hod (Glory), 
Yesod (Intimacy), Malchut (Majesty). The seven attributes correspond 
to the seven archetypal persons: Abraham, Isaac, Israel, Moses, Aaron, 
Joseph, and David. The Seven S’phirot are manifested in us either on 
the side of holiness and order, or on the side of defilement and chaos. 
They are virtues on the holy side and vices on the side of evil. 
ARCHETYPAL 
DIVINE S'PHIROT PERSON VIRTUE VICE 
Chesed (Loving-kindness) | Abraham Love Lust 
Gevurah (Severity) Isaac Respect Fear 
Tiferet (Beauty) Israel Compassion Indulgence 
Netzach (Victory) Moses Efficiency Pedantry 
Hod (Glory) Aaron Esthetics Vanity 
Yesod (Intimacy) Joseph Loyalty Promiscuity 
Malchut (Majesty) David Leadership  Stubbornness 
@>> €€e> 


170 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
(1923]SMAKY 
IO 
feu,g 
ay) 
UT 
IWOTeYS-JaIyIeYyIS 
UeW]e7 
WoY 
paidepy) INYIeW-Pposa 
A 
INYIeP-POH, 
| mnyosepy-yoezian_y 
| 
NY 
eP-232951 
| 8b 
eS 
a 
Sb 
& tb Ib Ob 6¢ BE le 9€ POH? RY>I]e/ POH “POs igee POH-4pez32N POH13311 | POH-Yyesnaan ee ce bf €€ z¢ I€ Of 62 YdeZIN -INYIeyy YSPZIIAY-Posa Yoe219N- poy YIEZIINT-YIeZIIAY Jf] -INYyIeyP] 3919}! | -Posa 1919}! | - POH JOJO} | -YIEZIIN, yeinaad-posa) eee YeINAI-YdeZIIN ZI 12 yeinadt-nyoyeyy 
€1 P2S9Yc)- 
Pos? 
A 
P2s24-POH al 
l 9 Pasay-anysyeyy 
S 
mNYydjeW-Yyesnaae“) 
NYI[eYW\-Peseyu7) ad INYDTEWINY>|EPY 
6b 
lepuayed 12WC, suotysey 
SITY} 
Ul 
‘IOLYd 
§ BUIAIG] 
JY) 
JO 
SUOIEUIqUIOD 
ajqissod 24) 
JO 
BuO 
sjuasaidas 
poliad 
1awo 
ay) 
Jo 
skep 
6p 
ay) 
JO 
ydea 
‘A]ZUIPIONIy 


COUNTING THE OMER -: 17] 
@> PRESENT PRACTICE «ee 
In our own generation, the period of the omer has been somewhat 
altered by several factors. One is that among practically all Reform and many 
Conservative Jews, the actual counting of the days and many of the mourning 
practices have fallen into disuse. Lag B’Omer survives as a special day of 
celebration; we will examine it in more detail later in the chapter. Another 
aspect of change is that two special commemorative days have been intro- 
duced in the period: one memorializing the victims and the resistance in the 
Nazi Holocaust, and the other commemorating the declaration of Israeli 
independence in 1948. These will also be taken up in their specific places. 
The result of these changes is that the tone and approach of the period from 
Pesach to Shavuot is to some extent now in flux. More experiment and more 
re-evaluation seems likely before the old patterns are renewed or new ones 
worked out. 
PRACTICE OF Lib COUN IGUNG 
The Hebrew for counting is s’phirah; so the practice and the period are 
known as S’phirat Ha-Omer or often simply as S’phirah. The count begins on 
the second night of Pesach—traditionally, at the end of the evening prayer 
service, but in many families where there is a second Seder, in the part of the 
Seder after the meal. The heart of the counting is the recitation of the 
Biblical verse that commands the counting, followed by a blessing and 
the count itself. 
Even on the first night, Sheh-hechianu, the blessing “Who has kept us 
alive until this season,” which is usually said at the onset of a new season or 
festival, is not said because the omer is felt to be partly a preparation for 
Shavuot—so Sheh-hechianu is most legitimately said then. 
Hin’ni muchan u’mzuman I|’kayem mitzvat aseh shel s’phirat ha-omer, 
k’mo sheh-katuv batorah: U’sphartem lachem mimacharat hashabat 
miyom havi-achem et omer ha-tnufah sheva shabatot t’mimot tih’yena 
ad mimacharat hashabat hashvi-it tispr'u chamishim yom. 
Baruch atah Adonai elohenu melech ha-olam asher kid’shanu b’mitz- 
votav vitzivanu al s’phirat ha-omer. 
’ 
Ha-yom ... yamim, sheh-heym ... shavuah ... u . yamim 
la-omer. 
Here I am, ready and prepared to do the command of counting the 
omer, as is written in the Torah: “You shall count for yourself from 


172 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
the day after the day of rest; from the day of bringing the sheaf of the 
wave-offering, there shall be seven full weeks; until the day after the 
seventh week you shall count—fifty days. 
Blessed are you, Lord our God, ruler of time and space, who makes us 
holy with His commandments and commands us about counting the 
omer. 
Today is the _________ day, comprising ______ weeks _ and 
days, for the omer. 
Among Chassidic Jews and others influenced by the mystical Kabbalah, 
the counting is preceded by a spoken or murmured kavannah or directed 
intention that the command is being fulfilled in order to bring closer the 
reunion of the masculine and feminine, the transcendent and ever-present 
aspects of God, the rebuilding of the spiritual Temple and the advent of the 
Messianic Age. In some households, the count is followed by another prayer: 
“May the Compassionate One restore the holy service to the Holy Temple in 
her place for us, speedily and in our own days.” 
Traditionally, anyone who forgets to do the counting in the evening 
may do it the following day, but without saying the blessing, and may then 
say it at night from then on, with the blessing. But anyone who misses 
counting the day altogether should pick up the count when s/he remembers, 
but without saying the blessing. This omission is because the blessing recog- 
nizes the fulfillment of the command, and the command is to do the whole 
counting—so missing one day is a failure to fulfill the command. 
Conversely, one should not fulfill the command to count lightly and 
without attention—for example, by saying casually to someone, “Today is 
the fortieth day of the omer.” Instead, if people forgot what day it was they 
traditionally told each other what yesterday’s count was. 
In order to remember from night to night what the correct number in 
the omer was, some households have made or bought omer counters. These 
can be simple notebooks where the pages can be turned and will lie flat to 
show a number—perhaps one that is calligraphed or illustrated—or small machines of more or less artistry where a knob can be turned or a dial twisted. 
In some traditional communities, it is the custom not to do work from 
sunset till dawn—and among Sephardim, there is an especially strong custom that women not work at night during the omer. One commentary says that this custom is a memorial to Akiba’s students—who were buried at night so that the daytime work of the whole Jewish community in Judea would not be disrupted by their funerals. (For the funerals of students and teachers of Torah, everyone stopped working; and so many died that every town would 
have been closed down.) 


COUNTING THE OMER + 173 
Except on the festive days during the omer—Rosh Chodesh (New 
Moon), Lag B’Omer, and for some Israeli Independence Day—haircuts, 
weddings, and musical concerts or other public celebrations are avoided. 
Running parallel with the omer is the public reading in synagogue of 
Pirkei Avot, Ethics of the Fathers. This reading begins at the end of the 
afternoon service on the Shabbos after Pesach, when it replaces the reading 
of Psalm 104 and the Songs of Ascent (Psalms 120-134) that run through the 
winter season. Pirkei Avot is a section of the Mishnah with five chapters, and a 
sixth section was added for public reading so as to make it possible to read one 
chapter each Shabbos from the one after Pesach to the one before Shavuot. 
Sephardic congregations stop there; Ashkenazic ones start over again, read- 
ing a chapter a week in a spiral of four readings that are completed the 
Shabbos before Rosh Hashanah. (On the last two readings in this pattern, 
two chapters are read so as to finish Pirkei Avot before Rosh Hashanah. ) Pirkei 
Avot contains a number of pithy aphorisms, which lend themselves to 
discussion by a public not deeply versed in Torah study: 
If your deeds outreach your wisdom, your wisdom will endure; if your 
wisdom outreaches your deeds, your wisdom will not endure. . . 
Who is wise? Whoever learns from everyone. Who is strong? Whoever 
subdues the impulse toward evil. Who is rich? Whoever is content. 
Who is honorable? Whoever honors all that is created. 
HOLOCAUST MEMORIAL DAY 
The twenty-seventh of Nisan, twelfth day of the omer, was set aside in 
1951 by the Israeli Knesset (Parliament) as Yom Hashoah v'’Hagvurah, Day of 
the Destruction and Heroism. (It is usually called simply Yom Hashoah, 
Holocaust Day.) 
It is not totally clear why the Knesset chose that particular day. It falls 
somewhat after the date of the uprising of the Warsaw Ghetto against the 
Nazis (the first day of Pesach in 1943), and may be taken to symbolize the fall 
of the Ghetto. The mournful tone of the omer period may also have helped 
determine the date. In 1953 the Knesset created the Yad Vashem Authority 
to perpetuate the memory of the Holocaust, and specified that one of its tasks 
is to strengthen awareness of the memorial day. In 1959 and 1961 the Knesset 
provided for public observances and memorials on Yom Hashoah, and for 
closing entertainment places on the evening of the day. 
The process of working out a ceremonial practice for Yom Hashoah is 
still under way. In the Diaspora, observance is growing but is still undertaken 
by a minority and in a wide variety of ways. Not all observances are on the 
twenty-seventh of Nisan. Among many who were themselves survivors of the 


174 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Holocaust and especially of the various Jewish uprisings, the custom grew up 
of holding public meetings on April 19, the anniversary in the Western 
calendar of the beginning of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising. Among others, a 
weekend day or evening nearest to Yom Hashoah is, for convenience, 
frequently chosen as the time for observance. Some leaders have suggested 
that the Nazi Holocaust be incorporated among the disasters commemorated 
on Tisha B’Av, the Memorial Day for the Destruction of the Temple (see 
Chapter XII). 
Forms of observance are even more diverse. There seems to be a growing 
custom for congregations and individuals to light six yahrzeit memorial can- 
dles, in memory of the six million Jews who were murdered in the Holocaust. 
Many observances include recitation of the Mourners’ Kaddish and Eyl Maleh 
Rachamim, parts of the traditional service for mourning the dead. Some 
congregations, particularly chavurot (intimate participatory congregations or 
fellowships) and Hillel houses on university campuses, have used an ex- 
traordinarily powerful liturgical drama by David Roskies, Nightwords: A 
Midrash on the Holocaust. Nightwords intertwines modern poetry in Yiddish, 
Hebrew, and English with passages of bald recitation of the facts of the 
Holocaust, with traditional passages of prayer. Parts for recitation and acting 
out can be assigned to 36 people (in accord with the tradition that only the 
continuing existence of 36 fully decent people makes possible the survival of 
the world). The overall effect of Nightwords is a profound and harrowing 
collision between traditional pieties about God, the world, and the Jewish 
people—and radical questions put to all those traditional understandings. 
(The text is available from the national Hillel office.) 
Various forms of secular public gatherings have been another approach 
to observance of Yom Hashoah. Some such gatherings have recited and heard 
Yiddish poetry, in the original and in translation, and the playing of Jewish 
music from Eastern Europe. The goal here has been to assert that the Nazis’ 
effort to annihilate Yiddish culture failed; and that instead that culture 
continues, though wounded, to live and to enrich the emerging Jewish 
cultures of the next few centuries. Another kind of public gathering has 
focused upon speeches that reassert the lessons of the Holocaust. 
One song of the Jewish Resistance movement has become a motif of 
Yom Hashoah observances. The tradition of Holocaust survivors is to sing it 
always standing: 
Zog nit keyn mol az 
du geyst dem letstn veg, 
Chotsh himlen blayene 
farshtein bloye teg. 
Kuman vet noch undzer 
oysegebenkte sho- 


COUNTING THE OMER + 175 
S’vet a poyk ton undzer 
trot-mir zaynen do! 
Fun grinem palmenland 
biz vaysn land fun 
shney, 
Mir kumen on mit undzer 
payn, mit undzer vey, 
Un vu gefain s’iz a 
shprits fun undzer blur, 
_Shprotsn vet dort undzer 
gvure, undzer mut. 
S’vet di morgnzun bagildn 
undz dem haynt, 
Un der nechtn vet farsh- 
vindn mitn faynd, 
Nor oyb farzamen vet 
di tzun in dem kayor- 
Vi a parol zol geyn 
dos lid fun dor tsu dor. 
Dos lid geshribn iz mit 
blut un nit bit blay, 
S’iz nit keyn lidl fun 
a foygl af der fray, 
Dos hot a folk tzvishn 
falndike vent 
Dos lid gezungen mit 
naganes in di hent! 
Never say that you are 
going your last way, 
though leaden skies 
blot out the blue of day. 
The hour for which we 
long will certainly appear. 
The earth shall thunder 
beneath our tread—we 
are here! 
From lands of green 
palm trees to lands all 
white with snow, 
We are coming with our 


176 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
pain and with our woe, 
And wherever a spurt 
of our blood will light, 
there will sprout our 
courage, Our might. 
For us the morning sun 
will gild the day and 
the enemy and past will 
fade away. But should 
the dawn delay or sun- 
rise wait too long, then 
let all future genera- 
tions sing this song. 
This song was written 
with our blood and 
not with lead, 
This is no song of free 
birds flying overhead, 
But a people amid 
crumbling walls did 
stand, 
They stood and sang 
this song with rifles 
held in hand. 
ISRAEL INDEPENDENCE DAY 
The proclamation of the birth of the modern State of Israel was made on 
the 5th day of lyar, 5708 (May 14, 1948) the twentieth day of the omer. The 
anniversary is a public holiday in Israel. A date nearby—usually the Sunday 
before or after—has become a day of rallies and celebrations for many Jewish 
communities in the Diaspora, especially in the United States. 
In Hebrew the day is known as Yom Ha-atzma-ut. That is usually translated Independence Day, but atzma-ut comes from the Hebrew root for bone, and hints at the positive affirmation of an identity, at standing on one’s own feet, rather than at the rejection of a hanging-on past as does the English word in-de-pendence. So a better translation might be Identity Day or Self-Affirmation Day. In this light, Yom Haatzma-ut celebrates not only a past event but the continued striving in the present and future to affirm one’s own identity. 
In Israel, Yom Ha-atzma-ut begins after a day of deep mourning: Yom Hazikkaron or Remembrance Day, in honor of those who died defending 


COUNTING THE OMER - 177 
Israeli independence. The transition from mourning to strong celebration is 
remarkable. As night falls, and Yom Ha-atzma-ut begins, people go out to 
dance in the street and shoot off fireworks. All the next day there are 
parades, public rallies, announcements of literary and artistic prizes, hikes to 
historic sites, and family picnics. 
There are both secular-national and religious liturgies for the day. At 
Mount Herzl, near the grave of Theodore Herzl who in the 1890s initiated 
the modern political movement to create a Jewish state, the speaker of the 
Knesset lights a torch, which in turn lights twelve torches representing the 
twelve tribes of Israel. There is a gun salute; the number of rounds fired 
corresponds to the years of independence. 
Rabbinical authorities of various orientations in Israel have worked out 
different—sometimes conflicting—liturgical patterns. For some, the day is 
treated as a festive break in the omer mourning. Some congregations blow the 
shofar at the end of evening services and pray that as the dawn of redemption 
has begun to shine forth, they hope to hear the shofar of Messiah, come 
speedily in our own day. Most Israeli Orthodox congregations in the morning 
service recite the Hallel psalms of praise, but some do only part of Hallel (as on 
the later days of Pesach or on Rosh Chodesh), and some omit the blessings 
before and after Hallel. These limitations are a way of compromising between 
the desire to praise God for Israel’s independence and the desire not to 
deduce a divine command to do so or to make a major festival on a day not 
authorized by ancient tradition. 
Some congregations read a Torah portion—some Deuteronomy 7:1- 
8:18; others, Deuteronomy 30:1-10. The former is a rather rigorous and 
harsh-minded passage from Moses’ address to the people about their impend- 
ing entry into Canaan, and the dangers of idolatry and of forebearance they 
may face there. The latter is a somewhat gentler forecast of a re-entry into the 
Land of Israel much further in the future, after an exile of punishment—a 
re-entry into delight and well-being rather than harsh danger. 
In the Diaspora, few congregations have adopted these liturgical 
changes into their practice and prayerbooks. In cities where there are large 
Jewish communities, Yom Ha-atzma-ut, or the nearest Sunday to it, has 
become a day of public demonstrations of solidarity with and political support 
for Israel. (In New York City, there are both an Israel Independence Day 
parade and a Solidarity with Soviet Jewry parade, both on Sundays in May or 
June.) The basic pattern is that of the ethnic parade with political implica- 
tions, initiated by Irish-American communities a century ago as the St. 
Patrick’s Day Parade, and since adopted by Italians and other ethnic groups. 
There are often speeches by politicians, parades with floats and high-school 
bands, and contingents from a wide variety of organizations. In recent years, 
some efforts have been made to incorporate Jewish folk fairs in which Jewish 
arts, crafts, and music can be displayed and learned. 


178 : SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Celebrations of Yom Ha-atzma-ut usually include the singing of Hatik- 
vah, The Hope, which was originally the song of Zionist activists and became 
the national anthem of Israel: 
Kol od baleivav penima 
Nefesh Yehudi homiya 
Ulfa-atei mizrach kadima 
Ayin leTzion tzofiya 
Od lo avda tikvateinu 
Hatikva shnat alpayim 
Liyot am chofshi be-artzeinu 
Eretz Tzion vi’ Yerushalayim. 
As long as a Jewish heart 
beats, the Jewish soul 
longs, and Jewish eyes 
look eastward to Zion, 
Our two thousand year old 
hope to be a free people 
in Zion and Jerusalem 
is not lost. 
LAG B’OMER 
In the pattern of Hebrew counting where the letters represent various numbers, lamed stands for 30 and gimel for 3. Lamed-gimel or lag therefore is 33, and the 33rd day of the omer is therefore Lag B’Omer. On this 33rd day of the omer (which comes on the 18th day of the month of lyar) there is a special festival. Why it comes on that day is utterly unclear. There is one legend that the plague that decimated Akiba’s followers ended on that day. There is another that on that day Akiba defied the Roman authorities by taking his students into the wilderness to study Torah, and disguised his intent by taking bows and arrows along as if they were, like Romans, hunting game. For that reason, goes this version, Jews have celebrated Lag B’Omer with archery contests in the woods. 
Still others see Lag B’Omer as simply a relaxation and release from the mourning that dominates the omer season. And others connect it and its arrow-shooting and bonfire celebrations with the ancient Anglo-Germanic custom of shooting arrows at demons on May Day, when they are thought to be especially dangerous, and the Celtic and Swedish customs of lighting May Day bonfires to frighten demons and witches away. 
Another cluster of legends has it that on Lag B’Omer one of the great Talmudic rabbis—Shimon bar Yochai—either was ordained by his teacher 


COUNTING THE OMER : 179 
Akiba, or emerged from the caves in which for years he had hidden from the 
Romans who were seeking his arrest, or he died. Since Shimon bar Yochai 
became identified as one of the great mystics, and since the greatest book of 
Jewish mysticism, the Zohar, names him as its author even though it was 
written twelve centuries after his death, he became one of the greatest models 
and heroes of the Kabbalists. They celebrate Lag B’Omer with pilgrimages to 
Shimon’s grave at Meron, near Safed in Israel. The pilgrimage has become a 
gigantic outpouring of Chassidim and others who identify with the mystical 
tradition. Great bonfires are lit and a festival of wedding between heaven and 
earth is celebrated. 
Since haircuts are not permitted during most of the omer but are on Lag 
B'Omer, many three-year-olds get their first haircuts at Meron on that day. 
Why three-year-olds? Abraham and Sarah’s son Isaac (the first child to be 
Jewish from birth) was weaned when he was three years old, according to 
rabbinic midrash. So this was traditionally defined as the age for a child 
(traditionally, a boy) to move into the first Jeve! of responsibility to obey the 
commandments. One of these is to wear a four-cornered garment with tzitzit, 
ritual fringes—and this is undertaken when the child is three by wearing a 
tallit katan, a miniature version of the prayer shawl in the form of a pull-over 
undershirt with tzitzit at the four corners. Another is beginning to wear the 
hair with payot, corners—that is, earlocks—in recognition of the command- 
ment not to cut the corners of the beard. And so... the haircut. In a 
broader sense, the haircuts at Meron stimulate the feeling of shared commu- 
nity and the excitement of seeing a whole age-group of children entering the 
next stage of growing up. 
In most present practice among American Jews, Lag B’Omer is a day of 
hikes in the woods, picnics, and playful archery among schoolchildren 
especially. Among Conservative and Orthodox Jews especially, it has be- 
come a day for weddings and for public concerts of Jewish music—since these 
are forbidden at most other times during the omer season. 
YOM YERUSHALAYIM 
On June 7 in the year 1967, which was equivalent to twenty-eighth of 
lyar in the Jewish calendar, Israeli armed forces established their control over 
the Old City of Jerusalem and reopened Jewish access to the Western Wall of 
the ancient Temple compound. The Western Wall was the last remaining 
wall of the great structures built by King Herod as retaining walls and defenses 
for the Temple Mount. (It was not the wall of the Temple itself.) After the 
Roman army captured and burned the Temple in the year 70 C.E., they 
destroyed the other Herodian walls but left the Western Wall standing— 
according to one tradition, in order to show how mighty was the defensive 
system they had smashed. 


180 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
From then on, Jewish tradition understood the Western Wall as the 
place to which the Shechinah, God’s Presence in the world, had fled in exile. 
She represented still the contact point, weak but surviving, between God and 
the Jewish people. So the Wall became a sacred place of Jewish prayers and 
lamentations. It became known as the Wailing Wall, and the custom arose of 
leaving little prayerful petitionary notes to God, kwitlech, tucked between its 
Massive stones. 
After the declaration of Israeli independence in 1948, the ensuing war 
between Israel and its neighboring Arab states, and the achievement of a 
cease-fire between the Arab states and Israel in 1949, the cease-fire line ran 
through the city of Jerusalem. The original United Nations plan had been for 
a Jewish state, a Palestinian state, and an internationalized city of Jerusalem. 
But most of the Palestinians and the other Arab states had rejected this 
arrangement, and the fortunes of war left the old city of Jerusalem, including 
the Western Wall, together with most of the area originally intended for a 
Palestinian state, entirely under the control of the Kingdom of Trans-Jordan. 
Trans-Jordan renamed itself Jordan and announced it had annexed Jerusalem 
and the Palestinian areas called the West Bank of the Jordan River. But most 
governments did not recognize the annexations, viewing the region’s future 
as unsettled, to be determined by negotiations. The cease-fire was not 
converted into a peace treaty, and hostility between Jordan and Israel 
remained so intense that Jordan refused to allow Jews any access to the 
Western Wall. 
During the renewed outbreak of war between Israel and the Arab states in June 1967, the Israeli Army established its control over the West Bank areas formerly controlled by Jordan, including Jerusalem. When it was again possible for Jews to come to the Western Wall, there was an intense outburst 
of joy and thanksgiving among most Jews throughout the world. Shortly afterward, Israel announced it had annexed Jerusalem as part of Israel proper, but would allow free access for people of all religious groups to the holy places in the city. Most governments of other countries refused to recognize this annexation, again looking forward to negotiations that might decide the city’s future. Some of them began to urge the creation of a Palestinian state that would include part of Jerusalem. 
For both religious and national-secular reasons, the result of this history was the emergence during the 1970s of an effort by some Jews to celebrate the twenty-eighth day of lyar, as Jerusalem Day—Yom Yerushalayim. The Israeli government and some secular Jews wanted to do this as a way of proclaiming permanent, non-negotiable Jewish sovereignty over all of Jerusalem. Some religious Jews viewed the reassertion of Jewish access to the Western Wall and Jewish control over the site of the Holy Temple as a fulfillment of ancient prophecy and perhaps a sign of the onset of the Messianic Era. So they, too, wished to celebrate the day. Other Jews who did not necessarily 


COUNTING THE OMER « 18] 
agree with the most far-reaching assertions about the meaning of the day 
nevertheless felt strongly about preserving the renewed Jewish presence in 
Jerusalem, especially at the site of the Temple and the Wall. They, too, 
wanted to celebrate the day. The result has been the emergence of a mixture 
of secular and religious celebrations of the twenty-eighth of lyar. Their form 
is very fluid, both in Israel and outside it. 
Films about Jerusalem, a day-long hike around the walls of the entire 
Old City, concerts of songs devoted to Jerusalem, prayers for its continued 
unity, have all been aspects of various celebrations. The numbers of people 
who take part in such observances is growing, but is still considerably smaller 
than those involved in some form of observing Yom Ha-atzma-ut. Whether 
Yom Yerushalayim will solidify into permanence, continue as it is, or fall into 
disuse, remains unclear. 


182 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
@>> NEW APPROACHES €€€® 
Many modern American Jews do not see anxiety as an acceptable 
emotion for themselves; and the combination of mild mourning and ritual 
counting that characterize the traditional practice of the omer season are the 
quintessence of anxiety. Yet the process of coming to fruition, moving from 
birth to adulthood, is an appropriate time for anxiety. Will we find our way to 
Sinai, to some new path of life? Will the wheat crop flourish and the trees 
bear fruit? If not, what then? 
The modern temperament seeks to act—so as to discharge the anxiety. 
When Fabrangen, a free-standing chavurah in Washington, DC, tried to 
develop its own approaches to the omer, it tried to infuse the anxiety-laden 
clock-and-calendar-rhythm of the omer with the more relaxing, fluid, and 
spontaneous rhythms of the Song of Songs—especially because the Song 
celebrates the springtime vividly. People tried to: 
- Get to know a new flower each of the seven weeks of the omer: smell 
it, look deeply at it, watch it change, absorb its color, its shape, its patterns— 
with the sense that flowers could in some ways replace the growing grain as an 
aspect of springtime. 
* Get to know a new person each of the seven weeks—either a nearby 
person with whom it was possible to meet, have lunch, play tennis, do a trust 
walk (in which first one person, then the other is blindfolded and is led into a 
variety of places and situations); or a new person in fiction or essays, a writer 
who has written autobiography, etc. 
* Read one chapter a week of the Song of Songs—experiencing the 
chapter differently each night: its sounds and language patterns, its imagery, 
its story line. 
* Give an amount of money for tzedakah that increased each week. 
(Giving 25 cents a night the first week, 50 cents a night the second week, 75 
cents the third, and so on up to $1.75 a night the seventh week adds up to 
$49.) 
These particular practices are only an example of what could be done. 
The goal should be to establish a regimen that recognizes the tension, hope, 
and anxiety of the March toward Sinai, and tries to act out the tension in 
such a way as to give relief—but only temporary relief. The full sense of full 
release can come only with the reaching of Sinai on Shavuot. 
The omer season can also be seen as a microcosm of the Jubilee cycle. In 
this cycle of renewing the land and the society of ancient Israel, described in 
Leviticus 25, there were seven weeks of seven years each, culminating in the 
Jubilee of the fiftieth year. In the smaller, seven-year cycle, the seventh year 
was one in which the land lay fallow and all debts were annulled. Then in the 
year after the forty-ninth year, the Jubilee was proclaimed; the land lay fallow 
for the second year in a row, and every family returned to the equal share of 


COUNTING THE OMER + 183 
land it had been allotted in the beginning. The rich were released from their 
surplus and the poor from their deficit; and all rested from their work 
together. Thus the primacy of God’s ownership of the land was joined to the 
need for communal repose and for restoration of economic equality. 
In the omer cycle, the seven weeks of counting are capped by Shavuot. 
To view the omer as a miniature version of the Jubilee cycle would suggest 
that a miniature community—a family, a household, a group of friends— 
agree to celebrate the omer together. On the seventh day of each omer week, 
the group could meet to share whatever the members most need: meditative 
time, food, help in dealing with a problem, study. 
Finally, it would be possible to develop for such chevras or friendship 
groups the Chassidic notion of the omer weeks and days as evocations of the 
seven S’phirot in their various permutations with each other. Friends could 
work together in seeking spiritual development or unfolding. 
@#> GO AND STUDY €€e 
For Yom Hashoah, see David Roskies, Nightwords: A Midrash on the 
Holocaust (B’nai B’rith Hillel Foundations, Washington, DC). André Neh- 
er’s The Exile of the Word (Jewish Publication Society) is an extraordinary 
modern midrash on the silence of God in the Bible and in Auschwitz. 


SHAVUOT 
“The time of the giving of our Torah."' (amidah for festivals) The fifty kernels of wheat represent the forty-nine days from Pesach to Shavuot plus one for the festival. The pomegranates are symbolic of the Torah. 


e>> CHAPTER ELEVEN «eesg 
PEAK EXPERIENCE— 
SHAVUOT 
‘h he spring comes to its climax, hovers on the edge of summer. The 
world is perfect: warm but not hot, ripe but not rotting. Those who had just 
given birth to a new self at Pesach have now matured their new identities, are 
ready to meet and encounter one another. The weddings that have been 
delayed all spring can now be celebrated. Both anxiety and hope are swal- 
lowed up in the moment of meeting. 
So now comes the moment of the great Meeting, the great Marriage, 
with the Infinite Orher. The people of Israel, on the trek from slavery, meet 
at the mountain—meet the Voice that becomes visible, meet the universe 
that sheds its silence and begins to Speak. The weeks of tension end in the 
Festival of Weeks—Shavuot. 
@>> ORIGINS «ee 
Shavuot is the only one of the great festivals for which the Torah gives 
no historical-political connection, but only mentions the natural and agri- 
cultural cycle. Yet later tradition identifies it as the anniversary of God's 
giving of the Torah at Mount Sinai. 
The Torah prescribes that the “Israelites shall hold a festival for the 
Feast of the Harvest, of the first fruits of your work, of what you sow in the 
field” (Exodus 23:16). “You shall bring from your settlements two loaves of 
bread as a wave-offering . . . baked after leavening, as first fruits to the Lord 
Go 


186 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
... On that same day you shall hold a celebration; it shall be a sacred 
occasion for you; you shall not work at your occupations” (Leviticus 23:17- 
23). “You shall observe the Feast of Weeks for the Lord your God, offering 
your freewill contribution according as the Lord your God has blessed you. 
You shall rejoice before the Lord your God with your son and daughter, your 
male and female slave, the Levite in your communities, and the stranger, the 
fatherless, and the widow in your midst, at the place where the Lord your 
God will choose to establish His name” (Deut. 16:10-12). 
When the Temple stood, there were two special aspects of the sacrifices 
for Shavuot: the two loaves of bread offered up by the priests for the nation as 
a whole, and the freewill offering brought by every family according to its 
own means, according to how God had blessed them. These offerings were 
brought from bikkurim, the first fruits, of the seven kinds of food plants for 
which the Land of Israel is specifically praised in the Torah: wheat, barley, 
grapes, figs, pomegranates, olives, and dates. 
Family by family, in pilgrim parties made up by clans, districts, and 
provinces, huge numbers of Israelites would travel to the Temple in Jeru- 
salem. Each family carried baskets of the bikkurim: the rich, baskets made of 
gold and silver; the poor, willow baskets. By night on their journey they slept 
in the public squares of the towns they passed through. 
The Mishnah describes the scene: 
And at the rise of morning an official says: “Rise and let us go up to 
Zion, to the House of the Lord our God!” An ox walked before them, 
its horns covered with gold, and with an olive-crown on its head. The 
chalil (flute) was played before them till they reached the vicinity of 
Jerusalem. Upon coming close to Jerusalem, they sent word ahead and 
decorated their bikkurim. The important officials went out to meet 
them. . . and all the tradesmen in Jerusalem stood before them and 
greeted them: “Our brothers, the men of such and such a place, you 
have come in peace!” 
The chalil was played before them till they reached the Temple 
Mount. Even King Agripas took the basket on his shoulders and carried 
it till he reached the courtyard. When the pilgrims reached the court- 
yard, the Levites sang: “I will exalt You, O Lord, for You have saved 
me and You have not rejoiced my enemies over me!” 
With the basket still on his shoulder, the Israelite read: “I have 
told the Lord your God this day, that I have come to this land which 
the Lord swore to our fathers to give to us ... My father was a 
wandering Aramean and he went down to Egypt and he sojourned 
there and he became there a great, mighty, and numerous people. And 
the Egyptians harmed us, and they afflicted us and they put hard labor 
upon us, and we cried out to the Lord, the God of our fathers and the 
Lord heard our voice . . . and the Lord took us out from Egypt with a 


SHAVUOT - 187 
strong hand. . . and He brought us to this place, and He gave to us this 
land, a land flowing with milk and honey. And now | bring the first 
fruit of the land which you have given me, O Lord.” After completing 
the entire parshah the Jew places the bikkurim basket by the side of the 
altar, he bows down, and goes out. 
And so every family publicly avows its share in the history of the people. 
Then the high priest acts on behalf of the people as a whole. He presented 
before the altar the special Shavuot wave-offering—two loaves of bread made 
of wheat, the first products of the spring wheat harvest that begins just as the 
barley harvest comes to an end. So Shavuot celebrates the success of the 
spring growing season—the growth of the new sprouts of spring into full- 
grown plants at summertime. But there is a special twist in this celebration of 
growth. The two loaves of bread are unusual—for they are explicitly the 
products of human labor. Not grain, not sheep or lambs or goats, straight 
from God’s hand—but bread, mixed and kneaded and leavened and baked, is 
the distinctive offering of Shavuot. So Shavuot celebrates the partnership of 
human beings with God in giving food to the world. Having received from 
God the rain, the seed, the sunshine, we give back to God not just a dividend 
on the natural growth, but the value we ourselves have added to it. 
So, into the period of the Second Temple, Shavuot was viewed simply 
as the festival of first-fruits. But toward the end of that period different 
understandings of Shavuot became part of an important debate within the 
Jewish people. At that point, deep disagreements were emerging between 
the Sadducees of the priestly caste who focused on the sacrificial system, and 
the Pharisees who were more interested in prayer and study of the Torah, and 
who were developing the theory of the two-fold Torah: written and oral. For 
the Pharisees, forerunners of the Talmudic rabbis, what was crucial was their 
sense of a continuing unfolding tradition that was truly Torah, stemming 
from Mount Sinai, but not written down. It could be worked out by doing 
midrash—searching for inner meanings in the Torah-text. It is necessary for 
us to understand how the Pharisees and later the rabbis felt about the Torah, 
if we are to understand what they came to believe about Shavuot. 
For the Pharisees and later for the rabbis, the process of their own 
wrestling with Torah was the way for them to meet with God. They were not 
priests, whose sacrifices brought a kind of rhythmic physical illumination. 
Their sense of the Presence came only from engaging with God’s Word. So 
powerful was their sense of the Torah as the contact point with God that they 
saw Sinai as the moment of a marriage between God and Israel, in which the 
Torah was the ketubah, the contract of the covenant. 
And so, for them it was as important for everyone in every generation to 
stand at Sinai as it was for everyone in every generation to escape from 
slavery in Egypt. For only if everyone can stand at Sinai can the Torah be 
heard anew in every generation. Only if the rabbis themselves can see the 


188 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Voice can they feel they are discovering Torah—not inventing it—when 
they discern some new approach in the old letters. 
How to inculcate this sense of presence at Sinai? There existed already, 
in Pesach, the holy day that brought everyone into tasting, literally tasting, 
the bitterness of slavery, the headiness of freedom, and the experience of 
sacrificing the Pesach lamb as their forebears had done on the awesome night 
of deliverance. Could there be such a holy day to teach the Jews to stand at 
Sinai? 
Perhaps there could. But as things stood, the Torah nowhere named 
with clarity the date on which the Torah was received. If there were to be a 
Torah festival, the rabbis would have to search and find it, hidden in the 
text. 
In what follows it is necessary for us moderns to try to imagine how the 
rabbis thought, in order to understand how they took the steps they did in 
transforming the meaning of Shavuot. Since we are moderns and they were 
not, we cannot be sure we understand correctly. The explanation may seem 
boring and obsessive. Yet because it involves an effort to understand Torah in 
new ways in order to meet new needs of a new society and era, it is an 
excellent example of one of the most characteristic modes of Jewish thinking. 
Suppose that the rabbis hoped there was, concealed in texts of Torah, 
an explanation that one of the festivals was the moment of Sinai. Which 
festival was possible? There were two ways to discern this: through the mood 
and feeling of the festivals; and through the timing and succession of the 
festivals. Yet even though a logical deduction or a philosophic meditation 
might be enough to give a hint, to show the way, for the rabbis that would 
not be enough to prove the point. For that, a proof text from the Torah 
would be needed. 
Very well. What could their logic and their feelings tell them? Most 
importantly, that the main point of God’s liberating the Israelites from Egypt 
was to make possible God’s giving them the Torah at Mount Sinai, and that 
since Pesach clearly celebrated that liberation, it would make sense that the 
next great festival, Shavuot, should celebrate the gift. Similarly, if Pesach 
celebrated the birth of the Jewish people, then it would make sense for the 
next great festival—Shavuot—to be the celebration of the wedding between 
the Jewish people and God. And finally, Shavuot already had special ele- ments of celebrating the God-Human partnership, because of the partnership 
required to make the bread-offering; and therefore Shavuot already had hints 
of Covenant. 
But there still needed to be a way of finding in the Torah itself that the date of Shavuot was, in the year of the Exodus from Egypt, the date of the 
Revelation at Sinai. So the ascertaining of these two dates became the crucial 
problem. There were two texts—one on Sinai, one on Shavuot—that had to be brought into contact with each other. 
The passage on the date of Sinai is, on its face, indefinite. It is Chapter 


SHAVUOT + 189 
19 of Exodus, which begins with a verse that can be translated either “On the 
third new moon,” or “In the third month,” “after the children of Israel had 
gone forth from the land of Egypt, on that very day they came into the 
wilderness of Sinai.” The chapter goes on to explain that the people trekked 
to the foot of the mountain and Moses conferred with God about the 
impending encounter at the mountain, taking some period of time that is not 
specified. After that came three days of purifying and preparing the people. 
Then came the Revelation at the mountain. 
To give a firm date for the Revelation would require knowing what the 
first verse of the chapter meant about the day the Israelites arrived in the 
wilderness of Sinai, and knowing how much time it took for the people then 
to reach the mountain and for Moses to confer with God. 
Now, to look at the other side of the problem, there is the question of 
the date of Shavuot; for this too, as we have seen in Chapter X on the omer, 
is not clear. Shavuot is to come fifty days after “the sickle is put to the 
standing grain” (Deut. 19:9) or after “the day after Shabbat,” where Shabbat 
has some unclear connection with Pesach (Lev. 23:11). When should count- 
ing begin? 
First possibility: does the counting begin whenever the grain is first ripe? 
If so, the date and weekday of Shavuot would change from year to year and 
there would be no hope of connecting it with Sinai—since Sinai did actually 
happen on a specific day in a specific year. 
Second possibility: is the “day after Shabbat” the day after the Shabbos 
that occurs during Pesach? This is what the priestly faction, the Sadducees, 
thought; so for them, Shavuot came always on a Sunday, but its date of the 
month changed from year to year because the Shabbos of Pesach came on a 
different date from year to year. This interpretation, therefore, would also 
make it impossible to pin down Shavuot to a date that could be matched up 
with the anniversary of the Revelation at Sinai—so it did not meet the needs 
of the Pharisees who were the prototypes of the Talmudic rabbis. 
From the standpoint of the Pharisees and rabbis, the only way to fix the 
date of Shavuot was to understand Shabbat as a fixed date. What could it be? 
If Shabbat were understood not as a weekly Shabbos with its shifting date but 
as a day of rest, then the particular day of rest involved might be either the 
first day or the seventh day of Pesach. In the one case, Shavuot would come 
on the sixth of Sivan; in the second, on the twelfth of Sivan*. The commun- 
ity at Qumran on the Dead Sea which left the famous Dead Sea Scrolls used 
still other calculations that resulted in fixing Shavuot on the fifteenth of 
*The Falashas or Beta Yisrael, a community of Jews in Ethiopia that became 
isolated from the rest of the Jewish people before rabbinic Judaism had developed 
and thus worked out and acted on their own interpretation, accepted the twelfth 
of Sivan as the date for Shavuot, and continue to celebrate it as the Festival of 
First-Fruits into our own generation. 


190 + SEASONS OF OUR Joy 
Sivan. Of these three possibilities, which would fit best with the possibilities 
for the date of Sinai? 
Let us now return to the passage about Sinai. The rabbis might have 
read the crucial verse about when the Israelites entered the wilderness of 
Sinai to mean three months after leaving Egypt, but that would have put the 
entrance into Sinai in the middle of the month of Tammuz, much later than 
even the fifteenth of Sivan, which seemed the latest possible date of Sha- 
vuot. Or they could have read it as on the third new moon that the people 
saw after leaving Egypt, but that would have put the entrance into Sinai still 
too late, on the first day of Tammuz. If they read the verse to mean in the 
third month of the process of leaving Egypt, that would give them the month 
of reaching Sinai as the month of Sivan. 
If the rabbis read the phrase later in the verse, “on that very day,” to 
refer to the full moon because that was the very day in Nisan that the 
Israelites left Egypt, then the Israelites would not enter Sinai until the 
fifteenth of Sivan—still too late to leave any time for the three days of 
preparation at the mountain and still have the Revelation coincide with 
Shavuot on the 6th, 12th, or 15th of Sivan. But if the phrase “on that very 
day” meant on the day of the new moon, that would mean the first day of 
Sivan was the day when the Israelites entered Sinai. 
If the people entered Sinai on the first of Sivan and the preparations at 
the foot of the mountain took three days, then if the Revelation had come on 
the sixth of Sivan there would have been three days for the people to march 
to the mountain and for Moses to converse with God; if the Revelation had 
come on the twelfth of Sivan, nine days; if on the fifteenth of Sivan, twelve 
days. The shortest period seems best to accord with the tasks that had to be accomplished. So the Pharisees and rabbis concluded that the Shabbat which set the start of counting fifty days was the first day of Pesach; that Shavuot fell 
on the sixth day of Sivan; and that Shavuot was not only the Festival of First-Fruits, but the season of the Giving of the Torah. 
And so it was, and so it came to be. The Jewish people accepted that Shavuot was the anniversary of Sinai. It became inconceivable that the Torah should specify no festival for its own anniversary, and inconceivable 
that the people could go forward in their wrestling with Torah unless they had some way of re-experiencing their original contact with it. And this the new aspect of Shavuot gave. 
Indeed, once the Temple had been destroyed the continuation of Sha- vuot would have been most difficult if this new aspect had not been accepted. For the celebration of Shavuot described in the Torah is entirely limited to the sacrifices of the wheat bread loaves and several animals. Where Pesach has its matzah and its bitter herb and the command to tell the story; where Sukkot has the leafy hut and the four kinds of vegetation to be waved; 


SHAVUOT - 19] 
Shavuot has nothing. It was unimaginable that one of the great pilgrim 
festivals commanded by the Torah be allowed to fall into disuse. 
It was not only intellectually unimaginable, but spiritually unworkable. 
For the cycle of celebration and the spiritual path that demands a season for 
birth demands as well a season for maturity and outreach. One cannot leap 
from birth to fulfillment, and from life-beginning to the ingathering of 
life-work—from Pesach to Sukkot—without achieving adulthood and part- 
nership in the meantime. It would be like leaping from being born to giving 
birth without having espoused another in between: impossible. 
In recognition of the importance of Shavuot in the motion of the yearly 
cycle, the rabbis gave it the name Atzeret. The root of this word means set a 
boundary, enclose, and thus, come to completion. Thus the rabbis pointed to 
its relationship to the Pesach festival—that what began in liberation could 
only be completed in revelation. They also hinted at a parallel between 
Shavuot—the Atzeret, completion, of Pesach, and Sh’mini Atzeret, the festi- 
val that completes Sukkot. 
So it was crucial to the wholeness of the yearly cycle and to the health of 
the Jewish people that Shavuot be saved after the Temple was destroyed. The 
way in which it was saved shows forth an utter rightness, a deep congruence, 
between the method and the content. For the rabbis needed to find a festival 
of hearing Torah because their whole path of Jewish life was built on hearing 
Torah in new ways. How did they find this festival? Precisely by hearing 
Torah in new ways. If the date of Shavuot had been specified in the text 
of Torah, or if Shavuot had been specifically called the Festival of the Giving 
of the Torah in the Torah text itself, the task of the rabbis would have been 
much simpler, but—to a modern’s mind at least—far less satisfying. They did 
midrash so as to discover, hidden in the text, the festival that makes it 
possible to keep on doing midrash. 
Just as the ancient Shavuot meant that human beings took God’s grain 
and shaped it into bread to offer up to God, so Shavuot since the Temple fell 
has meant that human beings took God’s Torah, shaped it into midrash, and, 
as it were, offered the Torah back to God. Our own identity, grown tall, is 
able to join in partnership with God. The shift can be seen in a graphic 
physical image of the Exodus. First the Jews are in headlong flight. For seven 
weeks they can see only the back of the head in front of them. Then at Sinai 
they meet a boundary, an Atzeret: The Face of God’s Own Self, face to face 
with them. They stop and for the first time face each other. They become a 
community, they receive the Torah which embodies their new freedom in 
the rules of a community. 
@>> €cep> 


192 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
@>)> SHAVUOT TODAY €€® 
On the afternoon of the last day of the omer, traditional Jews prepare for 
Shavuot with a visit to the mikveh, the ritual bath, or to any free-flowing 
river, lake, or sea. There the ceremony of total immersion helps achieve the 
oceanic feeling of oneness with the universe, often sought before any of the 
festivals, but especially before receiving the Torah. 
Meanwhile, the synagogue is being decorated with branches of green 
leaves—and in some places, roses on the Torah scrolls—as a symbol of the 
shift from spring to summer and as a memorial of the bringing of first-fruits to 
the Temple. 
The celebration of Shavuot itself begins at home with the lighting of the 
candles after the blessing “Baruch atah Adonai eloheynu melech ha-olam, 
asher kid’shanu b’mitzvotav vitzivanu l’hadlik ner shel yomtov. Blessed are 
You, Lord our God, ruler of time and space, who makes us holy through Your 
commandments and commands us to light the candles for this holy day.” The 
festival kiddush (similar to that for Sukkot) is said over wine, and with it 
Sheh-hechianu, the blessing “Who has kept us alive.” 
Households then congregate at the synagogue for the evening service. 
For most of the festivals, this service may be held a little early in order to add 
extra holy time to the time actually required; but not on Shavuot. Then the 
evening service is delayed until it is clearly dark and three stars are visible, 
since the counting of the omer before Shavuot must be seven full weeks, and 
the seven weeks would not be complete if Shavuot were begun early. 
The evening service follows the regular festival pattern. In the amidah, 
Shavuot is referred to as the Season of the Giving of our Torah. In many 
congregations, there is a custom of staying awake all night to read and discuss 
different elements of Torah in the broad sense—the written Torah from the 
five books of Moses; portions of the Prophets and of the Holy Writings; parts 
of the Talmud; sections of the great (13th century) mystical text, the Zohar; 
and for some, more recent Jewish thought like that of Martin Buber, Abra- 
ham Joshua Heschel, and Rav Avraham Yitzchak Kook of Jerusalem. This 
custom, called Tikkun Leyl Shavuot, the Repair of the Night of Shavuot, arose 
among the Kabbalists of Safed in the sixteenth century. They saw the tikkun 
as a ceremony of bedecking the bride on the night before the great Wedding 
of Sinai. 
One of the results of the tikkun is that it intensifies the experience that 
each person is directly and personally encountering the Torah, is actually 
present at Sinai. By drawing on the later Biblical, Talmudic, mystical, and modem interpretations of Torah, it also enriches the sense of Torah as not a one-time Revelation in the simplistic sense but a constantly unfolding pro- cess of Revelation in which everyone in every generation is able to be present. 
The all-night study of the tikkun serves also to give Shavuot a distinctive 


SHAVUOT + 193 
and memorable ceremony of its own. No one who has done the tikkun can 
forget the sense of triumph with which the congregation, bleary-eyed but 
excited, greets the sunrise and begins the morning service. 
In the morning service, all proceeds in the usual festival fashion through 
the amidah and the chanting of the full Hallel, the psalms of praise from Psalm 
113 to 118. The Torah service begins as usual, but in Ashkenazic communi- 
ties, after the first person is called up to the Torah, when the Scroll has been 
opened but before the reader recites the blessing, the poem Akdamut is 
chanted. The poem was written in Aramaic (a close relative of Hebrew, 
which was spoken by the common people of Talmudic times and which was 
the language in which most of the Talmud was written) by Rabbi Meir ben 
Isaac Nehorai of the German city of Worms in the twelfth century. 
According to tradition, Rabbi Meir was forced to take part in a public 
debate with priests over the correctness of Judaism versus Christianity—a 
technique frequently used by some elements of the Church in the Middle 
Ages to attempt to humiliate the Jewish communities and bring about 
conversions—-and wrote Akdamut as a song of spiritual joy to celebrate the 
Jewish people’s commitment to Torah in the face of pressure from other 
peoples and faiths. Presumably, too, he wrote it in Aramaic to keep its 
contents available only to Jews—since only Jews understood Aramaic, while 
some Christian scholars knew Hebrew. 
The poem begins with 44 lines whose first letters count off in order the 
22 letters of the Hebrew alphabet—twice. There follow 46 more lines whose 
first letters spell out ‘Meir, son of Rabbi Isaac, may he grow in Torah and in 
good deeds, Amen. And be strong and of good courage!” 
Three portions of the poem deserve special note: 
- The ecstatic opening which says of God, “Were all the skies parch- 
ment and all the reeds pens, all the seas inks and everyone a scribe, God’s 
grandeur still could not be near spelled out.” 
- A passage that carries forward the Shavuot theme of partnership 
between God and human beings by echoing an ancient legend: Just as 
traditional Jews on weekday mornings pray wearing the prayer-straps-and- 
boxes called t’fillin, bearing within them a parchment with the verses “Hear, 
O Israel, the Lord our God—the Lord is One,” so God, as it were, wears 
t'fillin that say “Great is Israel, a unique people.” 
- A passage that looks forward to the Messianic moment when the 
beasts that symbolize ungovernable rage and evil, the sea monster Leviathan 
and the land monster Behemoth, will be slain at last by God’s ultimate 
justice, to become the food of the upright in the Messianic banquet of 
harmony. 
You upright, having heard this hymn of praise, 
May you be in that blessed fellowship! 
You will deserve to sit among that circle 


194 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
If you obey God’s words of majesty. 
For God, in the heights at Beginning and End, 
Bent forward in love to give us the Torah. 
After Akdamut is responsively chanted by the reader or cantor and the 
congregation, the reading of the Torah goes forward. 
Sephardic and Yemenite congregations do not read Akdamut. Instead, 
just before the Torah reading there is read aloud a poetic ketubah, a marriage 
contract, between God and the People Israel. This reading echoes the rabbis’ 
sense of Sinai as the moment of an indissoluble wedding. One of the most 
widely used of these ketubot is by one of the sixteenth century mystics of 
Safed, Israel Najara: 
Friday, the sixth of Sivan, the day appointed by the Lord for the 
revelation of the Torah to His beloved people . . . The Invisible One 
came forth from Sinai, shone from Seir and appeared from Mount 
Paran unto all the kings of the earth, in the year 2448 since the 
creation of the world, the era by which we are accustomed to reckon in 
this land whose foundations were upheld by God, as it is written: “For 
He hath founded it upon the seas and established it upon the floods” 
(Psalms 24.2). 
The Bridegroom [God], Ruler of rulers, Prince of princes, Disting- 
uished among the select, Whose mouth is pleasing and all of Whom is 
delightful, said unto the pious, lovely and virtuous maiden [the people 
of Israel] who won His favor above all women, who is beautiful as the 
moon, radiant as the sun, awesome as bannered hosts: Many days wilt 
thou be Mine and I will be thy Redeemer. Behold, I have sent thee 
golden precepts through the lawgiver Jekuthiel [Moses]. Be thou My 
mate according to the law of Moses and Israel, and | will honor, 
support, and maintain thee and be thy shelter and refuge in everlasting 
mercy. And | will set aside for thee, in lieu of thy virginal faithfulness, 
the life-giving Torah by which thou and thy children will live in health 
and tranquility. 
This bride [Israel] consented and became His spouse. Thus an 
eternal covenant, binding them forever, was established between 
them. The Bridegroom then agreed to add to the above all future 
expositions of Scripture, including Sifra, Sifre, Aggadah, and Tosefta. 
He established the primacy of the 248 positive commandments which 
are incumbent upon all . . . and added to them the 365 negative 
commandments. 
The dowry that this bride brought from the house of her father 
consists of an understanding heart that understands, ears that hearken, 
and eyes that see. Thus the sum total of the contract and the dowry, 
with the addition of the positive and negative commandments, 


SHAVUOT + 195 
amounts to the following: “Revere God and observe His command- 
ments; this applies to all mankind” (Ecclesiastes 12.13). 
The Bridegroom, desiring to confer privileges upon His people 
Israel and to transmit these valuable assets to them, took upon Himself 
the responsibility of this marriage contract, to be paid from the best 
portions of His property. 
All these conditions are valid and established forever and ever. 
The Bridegroom has given His oath to carry them out in favor of His 
people and to enable those that love Him to inherit substance. Thus 
the Lord has given His oath. The Bridegroom has followed the legal 
formality of symbolic delivery of this document, which is bigger than 
the earth and broader than the seas. Everything, then, is firm, clear, 
and established. 
I invoke heaven and earth as reliable witnesses. 
May the Bridegroom rejoice with the bride whom He has taken as 
His lot and may the bride rejoice with the.Husband of her youth while 
uttering words of praise. 
BIBLICAL READINGS 
On the first day of Shavuot, and among Reform Jews and Israelis who 
celebrate only one day, the Torah reading is the passage of Exodus 19 and 20 
in which the Israelites enter the wilderness of Sinai, camp before the moun- 
tain, purify themselves, hear (or as the text says, see) God’s Voice deliver the 
Ten Commandments, and—overwhelmed by awe—send Moses forward to 
hear the detailed requirements of Torah. There is also a brief reading of 
Numbers 28:26-31, listing the sacrifices for Shavuot. It is customary for the 
congregation to stand for the reading of the Ten Commandments. 
The Prophetic passage assigned for the first day of Shavuot is from the 
first chapter of the Prophet Ezekiel, plus the single verse of Ezekiel 3:12. The 
chapter is one of the most astonishing passages in the entire Bible, a 
description of a mystical vision that gripped Ezekiel: 
In the thirtieth year, on the fifth day of the fourth month, when I was 
in the community of exiles by the Chebar Canal, the heavens opened 
and I saw visions of God. On the fifth day of the month—it was the 
fifth year of the exile of King Jehoiachin—the word of the Lord came to 
the priest Ezekiel son of Buzi, by the Chebar Canal, in the land of the 
Chaldeans. And the hand of the Lord came upon him there. 
I looked, and lo, a stormy wind came sweeping out of the north—a 
huge cloud and flashing fire, surrounded by a radiance; and in the 
center of it, in the center of the fire, a gleam as of amber. In the center 
of it were also the figures of four creatures. And this was their appear- 
ance: 


196 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
They had the figures of human beings. However, each had four 
faces, and each of them had four wings; the legs of each were [fused 
into] a single rigid leg, and the feet of each were like a single calf’s hoof; 
and their sparkle was like the luster of burnished bronze. They had 
human hands below their wings. The four of them had their faces and 
their wings on their four sides. Each one’s wings touched those of the 
other. They did not turn when they moved; each could move in the 
direction of any of its faces. 
Each of them had a human face [at the front]; each of the four had 
the face of a lion on the right; each of the four had the face of an ox on 
the left; and each of the four had the face of an eagle (at the back). 
Such were their faces. As for their wings, they were separated: above, 
each had two touching those of the others, while the other two covered 
its body. And each could move in the direction of any of its faces; they 
went wherever the spirit impelled them to go, without turning when 
they moved. 
Such then was the appearance of the creatures. With them was 
something that looked like burning coals of fire. This fire, suggestive of 
torches, kept moving about among the creatures; the fire had a 
radiance, and lightning issued from the fire. Dashing to and fro [among] 
the creatures was something that looked like flares. 
As I gazed on the creatures, I saw one wheel on the ground next to 
each of the four-faced creatures. As for the appearance and structure of 
the wheels, they gleamed like beryl. All four had the same form; the 
appearance and structure of each was as of two wheels cutting through 
each other. And when they moved, each could move in the direction 
of any of its four quarters; they did not veer when they moved. Their 
rims were tall and frightening, for the rims of all four were covered all 
over with eyes. And when the creatures moved forward, the wheels 
moved at their sides; and when the creatures were borne above the 
earth, the wheels were borne too. Wherever the spirit impelled them to 
go, they went—wherever the spirit impelled them—and the wheels 
were borne alongside them; for the spirit of the creatures was in the 
wheels. When those moved, these moved; and when those stood still, 
these stood still; and when those were borne above the earth, the 
wheels were borne alongside them—for the spirit of the creatures was in 
the wheels. 
Above the heads of the creatures was a form: an expanse, with an 
awe-inspiring gleam as of crystal, was spread out above their heads. 
Under the expanse, each had one pair of wings extended toward those 
of those others; and each had another pair covering its body. When 
they moved, I could hear the sound of their wings like the sound of 
mighty waters, like the sound of Shaddai, a rumult like the din of an 
army. When they stood still, they would let their wings droop. From 


SHAVUOT + 197 
above the expanse over their heads came a sound. When they stood 
still, they would let their wings droop. 
Above the expanse over their heads was the semblance of a 
throne, in appearance like sapphire; and on top, upon this semblance 
of a throne, there was the semblance of a human form. From what 
appeared as his loins up, | saw a gleam as of amber—what looked like a 
fire encased in a frame; and from what appeared as his loins down, | saw 
what looked like fire. There was a radiance all about him. Like the 
appearance of the bow which shines in the clouds on a day of rain, such 
was the appearance of the surrounding radiance. That was the appear- 
ance of the semblance of the Presence of the Lord. When | beheld ir, | 
flung myself down on my face. And | heard the voice of someone 
speaking. 
Then a spirit uplifted me and | heard behind me a mighty, roaring 
voice: “Baruch k’vod Adonai mimkomo. Blessed be the radiance of God 
forth from His place.” 
Why is this vision assigned for reading on Shavuot? It is obviously 
intended as a comment on, a parallel to, almost an interpretation of, the 
communal experience of receiving the Torah. It reminds us that the throng 
who stood at Sinai—600,000 men, perhaps 2 million people—was made up 
of individuals like Ezekiel—each of whom had his or her own vision. Exodus 
describes that experience as awesome-—-thunder, lightning, earthquake, vol- 
cano, an impenetrable darkness where God was—so awesome indeed that the 
people could not bear to keep on hearing God directly. But Exodus gives no 
account of a personal experience so freaky, weird—there is no other word— 
as that of Ezekiel. Yet Ezekiel is able to stay with the vision; he does not back 
away. 
So perhaps the connection between the two passages is teaching us, for 
one thing, that for every individual who stood and stands at Sinai, the lonely 
hearing of God’s Voice was, is, so strange as to shatter all the categories of 
description. Perhaps it is only a communal sharing of the burden, and 
afterward a communal sharing and merging of the memory, that makes the 
experience more manageable. 
There are several other remarkable aspects of Ezekiel’s vision. One is 
that the vision moves. At Sinai, the people and the mountain both stood firm 
and fast. For all the other Prophets, and for the Patriarchs and Matriarchs, 
the experience of God was rooted in a single place. But motion fills Ezekiel’s 
description of his vision. And the last line of the haftarah emphasizes not 
God’s settled presence in The Place, but God’s radiance coming from The 
Place. 
Another is that Ezekiel emphasizes that he is seeing and recording not 
only far from the Land of Israel, but in captivity. At Sinai the people were 
newly free and on their way to the Land. The passage from Ezekiel may 


198 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
therefore be teaching us that God is available far from home—whether a 
physical home or the spiritual home of freedom. God moves, to be with us 
wherever we need the Radiance. 
Ezekiel’s vision continues beyond what is included in the haftarah for 
Shavuot; and this continuation was also in the minds of the rabbis who 
assigned the reading. In Chapters II:8-III:9, Ezekiel explains that the 
Radiance of God gave him a scroll, written with lamentations, dirges, and 
woes, and told him to eat the scroll: “Child of Adam, feed your stomach, fill 
your belly with this scroll that I give you.” And Ezekiel ate, “and it tasted as 
sweet as honey to me.” 
Here the experience—especially felt in the context of Shavuot—seems 
to be teaching us that it is not enough to see and hear Torah. Torah must be 
taken into us, into our very bodies—must become part of our blood and 
breath and bone—for all its sorrows to be turned to sweetness. It is living 
Torah, not simply hearing it, that is to be the meaning of Shavuot. 
At Sephardic and Oriental congregations, during the musaf (additional) 
or mincha (afternoon) service a poem of Az-harot, by the poet of the Jewish 
Golden Age in Spain, Shlomo ibn Gabirol, is recited. Az-harot is a form of 
liturgical poem that recites those 613 commandments that, according to 
tradition, make up the full number of commandments in the written and oral 
Torah. The number of 613 was originally arrived at by adding 365, the days 
of the year, to 248, the number of bones that the rabbis believed were in the 
human body. The number thus metaphorically meant, “With every bone of 
my body, every day of my life, I will obey the commands of God in the 
Torah!” But once the number was set, generations of Jewish scholars made 
lists of what the 613 commandments were—often disagreeing with each 
other. And generations of Oriental and Sephardic poets wrote chants that 
listed them. For Shavuot, in congregations that use the Gabirol poem, the 
first day of Shavuot is devoted to the positive commandments—You shall 
do—and the second day to the negative commandments—You shall not do. 
SECOND DAY 
Jews outside the Land of Israel, except for congregations of the Reform 
movement, celebrate a second day of Shavuot for reasons arising from the 
ancient difficulty of being sure when the New Moon was. According to 
tradition, the second day of Shavuot was both the birthday and deathday of 
King David, the forebear and model of Messiah. So on the evening of the 
second day traditional congregations light a yahrtzeit candle to remember 
David. The congregants do not stay up all night, but stay together for a while 
after the evening service to sing some or all of David's psalms. 
The Torah readings for the second day of Shavuot are Deuteronomy 
15:19-16:17 (beginning earlier, at 14:22, if the day is also Shabbos), and 
Numbers 28:26-31. The haftarah is from the Prophet Habakkuk (2:20-3:19). 


SHAVUOT + 199 
It begins, “The Lord is in His holy Temple; be silent before Him, all the 
earth.” Then—astonishingly, since such a reading is never otherwise inter- 
rupted—among traditional Ashkenazic congregations the reading stops 
briefly for the recitation of an ecstatic poem about the gift of Torah, Yatziv 
Pitgam, that was written by the great twelfth century rabbi Jacob Ben Meir of 
Troyes, France—known as Rabbenu Tam. 
The memorial prayers for the dead, yizkor, are recited on the second day 
of Shavuot by mourning families for specific individuals and by the whole 
community in memory of those who died as martyrs for Kiddush ha-Shem, to 
hallow the Name of God. 
Depending on the congregation, at one or another time during Shavuot, 
traditional congregations read the Book of Ruth—assigned for this festival 
just as the Song of Songs is for Pesach. Ruth is about the Moabite woman who 
after her husband dies, follows her Israelite mother-in-law into the Jewish 
people: “Whither thou goest, I will go . . . and thy God will be my God.” 
She asserts the right of the poor to glean the leavings of the barley harvest, 
breaks the normal rules of behavior to confront her kinsman Boaz, is re- 
deemed by him for marriage, and becomes the ancestor of King David. 
There are many intertwinings between Ruth and Shavuot. One is her 
kinship with David, whose yahrtzeit day this is. Probably more important, the 
barley-harvest setting of the story echoes the harvest that is just being 
completed as Shavuot arrives. Most important of all, Ruth accepts Torah in 
her own individual way—a way utterly different from that of Ezekiel in that it 
is simple, gentle, and based on her love of her mother-in-law Naomi. 
CUSTOMS OF SHAY UOT 
In an attempt to strengthen the sense of ever-presence at Sinai, Jewish 
communities have connected Shavuot with crucial steps in the education of 
children in Torah. In many European Jewish towns and villages, it was the 
custom to introduce young children to Hebrew and the Torah on Shavuot 
morning: 
At dawn, the children are taken to the Synagogue, as it is written: “It 
was on the third day, at the coming of morning.” A tablet is brought on 
which the letters of the alphabet are written, as well as several indi- 
vidual verses: “Moshe commanded us the Torah,” “My faith shall be in 
Torah,” and the first verse in Vayikra. The teacher reads every letter, 
and the child repeats after him. The teacher puts a little bit of honey on 
the tablet and the child licks the honey from the letters. On a special 
honey cake verses from the Torah are written, and a Torah verse is 
written on a boiled egg. 
The teacher reads with the child everything on the tablet, on the 
cake and on the egg. After the children have finished their lesson, they 


200 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
are given the cake and the egg to eat. When the children are taken 
from their homes to the teacher’s home or to the synagogue, they are 
wrapped in a tallit or some special covering, in allusion to the verse: 
“And they stood at the bottom of the mountain.” The child is set on 
the arm of the teacher who then puts the child on a seat, as it is 
written: “As the nurse carries a suckling child,” and “] bore Ephra’im 
on my arms.” After the lesson, the child is brought to a river's edge, 
since the Torah is compared to water, in allusion to the verse: “May 
your wellsprings overflow outward.” The cake is made with much 
honey and milk, as it is written: “Honey and milk are under your 
tongue.” 
Rabbi Ya’akov Emden writes in his commentary to the Siddur: 
“In truth, | do not know why they did away with this custom 
completely. Even though the custom of eating a cake on which verses 
of Torah was written, is questionable, nevertheless all the other cus- 
toms which were observed (when children began the study of Torah) 
seems exceedingly proper. How then did it come about that so beautiful 
a custom as this, should be uprooted without reason? This could only be 
a result of a lack of reflection on a proper approach to the study of 
Torah” (Eliyahu Kitov). 
More recently, Reform Jews introduced the custom of the confirmation 
of 16-year-olds in Judaism at Shavuot. They had concluded that in the 
conditions of modern society, when children did not become independent 
adults or even take on a more independent emotional and intellectual life at 
age 13, it was important to add to the bar mitzvah some way to recognize a 
later stage of development. In the early German Reform synagogues, con- 
firmation of boys began in 1810 and of girls in 1817. At first a variety of days 
were used, but gradually the practice focused on Shavuot. On Shavuot in 
1846, at a German (that is, Reform) synagogue on Henry Street in New York 
City, the youngsters sang psalms, heard the rabbi exhort them to adhere to 
Judaism and Torah, promised publicly that they would do so, and received a 
blessing from their parents and the rabbi. 
Since then the Reform movement generally, many Conservative, and 
some Orthodox congregations have adopted the custom—usually in such a 
way as to reinforce the collective sense of a whole age-group receiving Torah 
together, rather than individually as in the bar and bat mitzvah. In some 
synagogues the entire class of 16-year-olds plans and leads the Shavuot 
service, introduces a creative element—such as a cantata on the themes of 
Ruth or Sinai, written and sung by the youngsters themselves—and then 
receives the priestly blessing from the rabbi. 
For reasons that are not altogether clear, the custom has arisen that 
milchig or dairy foods are especially prepared for Shavuot. Some commenta- 
tors connect the custom with a verse from the Song of Songs, “Honey and 


SHAVUOT - 20] 
milk are under your tongue”—which they suggest refers to the sweetness of 
Torah, and is acted out by cooking foods of milk and honey. Others suggest 
that when Israel first received as part of Torah the laws of kosher food, they 
had to abandon eating the newly forbidden meats and had to make their 
utensils kosher—so chose to eat only dairy foods in the meantime. But to a 
skeptical ear both explanations sound like pleasant associations with a 
teaching message, but not real origination points for the folk custom. 
Theodore Gaster points out that spring festivals in many areas of the 
world focus on cheese and other milk foods. To a pastoral society, the 
renewal of milk in cattle, goats, and ewes along with the spring birthings may 
have been the reason for this. Gaster points out that the Torah’s prohibition 
on boiling a kid in its mother’s milk is twice connected with the command- 
ment of the first-fruits offering of Shavuot. Perhaps such a ritual was part of a 
Canaanite spring celebration, and in reaction to it the Israelites ate only milk 
foods at the first-fruits festival. 
In Israel, the kibbutzim (collective farms) and other agriculture settle- 
ments have revived the first-fruits aspect of Shavuot. A procession of trac- 
tors, wagons, and trucks, filled with gardeners, poultry keepers, shepherds, 
orchardists, dairy workers, arrive from the fields—carrying grain, milk, eggs, 
honey. Carpenters, laundry-workers, child-care people, cooks, teachers join 
in parading to an open-air make-shift theater, where the fruits of the settle- 
ment’s labor are presented to the community. The children read poems, show 
drawings, dance a circle dance. Some of the community’s income may be 
dedicated to tzedakah, help for those in trouble. 
One of the favorite Shavuot songs celebrates the giving of Torah as part 
of the whole process of relationship with God: 
i 
Baw-rooch eh-lo-hay-noo 
sheh-b’raw-noo li-ch’vo-do (3). 
Od ha-pah-ahm, li-ch’vo-do (3). 
Blessed be our God who created us 
for His glory, who distinguished us 
from those who err, who gave us the 
Torah, and everlasting life. 
2. 
V’hiv-dee-law-noo min hah-to-eem (3). 
Od ha-pah-ahm, min hah-to-eem (3). 
of 
V’naw-tahn law-noo To-raht emet (3). 
Od ha-pah-ahm, To-raht emet. (3). 


202 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
4. 
V'chah-yay o-lam naw-tah b’to-chay-noo 
(3) 
Od ha-pah-ahm, b’to-chay-noo (3). 
In Eastern Europe, a special art form emerged in connection with 
Shavuot that has since become much broader: papercuts called shavuoslech 
(literally, little Shavuots) or raizelech (little roses). It may have developed 
when some rabbis tried to stop the custom of bringing greenery into the 
synagogue, fearing it was too like a pagan habit or looked too much like Palm 
Sunday in a Christian church. Seeking a form of decoration that would be 
acceptable, Lithuanian Jews may have hit upon the papercut as a way of 
showing greenery and flowers, letting the light shine through the cut-outs in 
the windows of homes and synagogues. The new art form spread beyond 
Shavuot-time; indeed, the illustrations in this book are based on papercuts 
and might be called grandchildren of the shavuoslech. 
@>> NEW APPROACHES €€€® 
In the long history of Jewish celebration, Shavuot meant first the 
festival of first-fruits and then the festival of receiving the Torah. One—or 
the other. Is it possible in our generation to integrate these two? The sense 
that underlines both the first-fruits and Torah-giving aspects of the festival is 
the basic sense of Shavuot as the season of the maturing of a new identity to 
the point where it can enter a partnership with another. Can this basic sense 
be expressed in new ways that integrate Torah and the first-fruits? 
The kibbutzim, together with Ezekiel’s experience, may point toward 
some ways of integrating the intellectual and physical experiences of Sha- 
vuot. In a modern industrial society, not all the first-fruits of our labor are 
agricultural; yet the early summer is often a moment of completion, a 
moment when the project begun at Rosh Hashanah time in early fall has 
come to some harvesting. Imagine ceremonies where people brought and 
shared some product of their effort—their success in teaching a child; the 
new way they found of designing a building; their exploration of some new 
knowledge, art, or craft; their search for a new place to live; their frustration 
over a failed experiment. Show and tell could illuminate the growth of a new 
aspect of self, and reach out to other newly growing selves. 
Ezekiel’s sense of the bodily manifestation of God in a moving chariot 
and of Torah in an edible scroll may say to us something about using our 
bodies more vigorously in receiving Torah: motion, dance, mime, gesture, 
the re-examination of our eating habits to advance our sense of living by the 
Torah—all these might be ways of celebrating Shavuot. 


SHAVUOT - 203 
Finally, there is a special legend from a marginal eddy in the stream of 
Jewish tradition that might offer us some new directions for Shavuot. The 
Book of Jubilees is a midrashic commentary on the Torah that was not part of 
either the rabbinic or priestly tradition. Indeed, one of the ways we know this 
is that it dated Shavuot on the 15th day of Sivan—neither the Pharisaic nor 
the Sadducean belief. The Book of Jubilees seems to have been connected 
with the independent communities at Qumran on the Dead Sea. 
It treats Shavuot as the day of many covenants—not just the covenant 
at Sinai. It bases this midrash partly on a pun: Shavuot means weeks, shevuot 
means oaths—including oaths of covenant. Beer-sheva, for example, is the 
Well of the Oath where Abraham and the King Avimelech promised to make 
peace. This oath, says Jubilees, was made on Shavuot. And on Shavuot, too, 
says Jubilees, God made the covenant with Noah and the human race not to 
destroy the world again. 
And it was on Shavuot, says Jubilees, that Abraham’s two sons—lIsaac, 
the forebear of the Jewish people, and Ishmael, the forebear of the Arab 
peoples—came together after their estrangement to be with Abraham while 
he was dying, to mourn his death together, and to make an oath of peace 
between them. 
So it may be that on Shavuot we might seek the meeting between the 
peoples that would carry out the ultimate meaning of the Meeting between 
God and our people at Mount Sinai: the Meeting of the covenant of peace. If 
Shavuot is the season at which one newly mature adult can reach out to 
another, the season that celebrates King David, forebear of Messiah, then to 
seek on that day a dialogue between Arabs and Jews, Israelis and Palestinians, 
Americans and Soviets, would be a way to embody that adulthood and to act 
on Torah. 
@3>> FOODS * €€& 
CHEESE BLINTZES 
FILLING PANCAKES 
2 cups dry cottage cheese 2 eges 
Yy cup sour cream 1 cup flour 
1 egg Yy teaspoon salt 
3 to 4 tablespoons sugar 1 cup milk or water 
Y, teaspoon cinnamon 1 tablespoon oil or butter (about) 
Ys, teaspoon salt 
Y, teaspoon lemon rind 
raisins if desired butter, sour cream, cinnamon and 
sugar, powdered sugar 
*Recipes by Hannah Waskow and Rose Gertz. 


204 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Filling: Mix all ingredients together, cover and refrigerate. 
Pancakes: Beat eggs until fluffy. Add water or milk, flour, and salr, to 
eggs. Heat oil in a 6-inch skillet. Spoon small amount of batter into skillet, 
covering the entire bottom, tilting quickly to help spreading. Fry gently only 
until batter is set. Turn out on dampened tea towel, stacking cooked side up. 
Place about two tablespoons filling in center of each pancake (cooked 
side down). Fold over three sides, tucking in fourth to make an envelope. To 
cook, fry in hot butter until golden brown, carefully turning once. To serve 
offer sour cream, cinnamon and sugar, powdered sugar. Makes 8 servings of 2 
each. 
May be made ahead of time and stored in refrigerator for use later in the 
day or frozen for several weeks. If frozen they will take longer to fry. They 
may be baked instead of fried. Use a greased sheet and paint with melred 
butter. 
DAIRY-NOODLE PUDDING 
(Milchige Lukshen Kugel) 
Y% |b. medium noodles 
Y to 1 cup large curd pot or cottage cheese 
2 eggs, separated 
3 tablespoons melted butter or margarine 
2 teaspoon salt 
2 tablespoons sugar 
Y. cup sour cream 
Y cup raisins 
1 teaspoon vanilla extract 
Yy teaspoon lemon extract 
1 teaspoon lemon rind 
Ys cup chopped nuts 
Y, teaspoon cinnamon 
Ys teaspoon allspice 
1 tart apple, peeled and diced. 
Break noodles in 2-inch pieces, in boiling salted water until render. Drain, 
but not too dry, and do not wash. Stir the cheese into the noodles. Bear the 
egg yolks with the butter, salt, sugar, extracts, rind, and spices. Fold into the 
noodles the egg yolk mixture, sour cream, raisins, and nuts. Fold in egg whites 
beaten stiff but not dry. Butter and lightly crumb with dry crumbs a 2-ar. 
casserole or 9-inch square pan. Turn mixture into pan, sprinkle with crumbs 
and dot with butter. Bake in moderate oven (350°) for about 45 minutes or 
until top is light brown. May be finished under broiler but watch carefully so 
it won’t burn. Will serve 6 to 9 people. Leftovers may be frozen and reheated 
wrapped in foil. 


SHAVUOT + 205 
TUNA, MACARONI, AND CHEESE 
1 6% oz. can tuna Y, cup dairy sour cream 
2 eggs, lightly beaten Y, cup sliced green onion, including 
1 cup small curd cottage cheese tops 
1 cup shredded Monterey Jack cheese tsp. salt 
6 oz. macaroni, cooked Ye tsp, pepper 
Ys cup grated Parmesan cheese Y cup milk 
Optional, ripe olives, mushrooms Garnish: paprika, parsley flakes, ore- 
gano 
Drain tuna. Combine eggs, cottage, Jack cheese, sour cream, onion, salt, 
pepper, nutmeg (olives and mushrooms). Stir in macaroni and tuna; pour 
into buttered casserole or 9 x 9-inch pan. Sprinkle with Parmesan, parsley 
flakes, oregano, paprika. Cover with foil and bake in 350° oven 45 minutes. 
Remove from oven and let set covered for 10 minutes before serving. Will 
serve four. 
CHOCOLATE ROLL CAKE 
(Yeast Dough) 
1 cup scalded milk 1 teaspoon salt 
1 oz or 1 dry package yeast Y, cup sugar 
Y, |b. butter 2 beaten eggs 
Y cup lukewarm water 5 cups flour 
Grated lemon and orange peel 
Dissolve yeast in lukewarm water. Add butter, salt, and sugar to scalded milk 
and allow to cool. Add yeast mixture and beaten eggs. Add flour until able 
to handle. Let rest 10 minutes then knead until smooth and elastic. Put in 
greased bowl turning to be sure entire surface is covered. Cover with cloth, 
put in warm (not hot) place and let rise until double in bulk. About 112-2 
hours. Punch down, knead several times and roll into sheets. Spread with 
melted butter, sprinkle generously with cocoa, cinnamon and sugar mixture, 
nuts, raisins, jelly, peel, minced apple, coconut and a few bread crumbs 
(about 1 teaspoon per sheet). Roll up. Cover and let rise until almost double. 
Paint with melted butter and sprinkle with cinnamon and sugar. Bake 375° 
until done. The mohn or prune mixtures may be used as fillings for this 
dough. 
@>> GO AND STUDY «€® 
See Philip Goodman, The Shavuot Anthology (Jewish Publication Socie- 
ty) and Irving Greenberg, Guide to Shavuot (National Jewish Resource Cen- 
ter, NYC). 


si seo: nee a ee ZACHRAH YIRUSHALAYIM 
“Jerusalem remembers in the days of her affliction and of her miseries all her 
pleasant things that she had in the days of old.”’ (Lamentations 1:7) The fallen 
keruv’s wing, broken palms and blossoms are a metaphor for the destruction of 
the Temple. (see Kings | 6:29) 


Ke> CHAPTER TWELVE eg 
BURNT OFFERING— 
TISHA B’AV 
il is the heart of summer: hot as a furnace, dry as the tomb. A shower, a 
breeze are forgotten memories. The earth is panting in exhaustion—almost as 
if the birthing of her harvest has gone awry, as if the birth-pangs will go on 
forever but there will be no fruit. And people are exhausted too; their 
freshness and fertility, warmed and renewed by the sun of spring, has wilted 
as the sun grew still hotter. We feel burnt out. The whole world is being put 
to the torch. 
On such a scorching summer day God’s holy house on earth was burnt. 
The Temple in Jerusalem—microcosm of the holy Earth—was put to the 
torch by Babylon, by Rome. The Great Powers of their day, the empires ruled 
by Sun Kings, had from a distance, pulsed new energy into the simmering 
Jewish culture. But now that energy came far too close, turned into a raging 
fire. The Temple collapsed in flames, the people shattered into slavery and 
exile. 
But we know that this moment of exhaustion and destruction is but a 
moment. We know that the earth passes safely through its too-hot exposure 
to the sun, that the crops coming to fruition in the fields do not burn up, that 
we will have a harvest and store the heat to keep us warm in winter. We 
know that our own eyes, blinded by the glare of the year’s noonday, will once 
again be able to see clearly. We know that the Jewish people will harvest 
something new in exile, will harvest its shattered, scattered selves into a 
reunited holiness. 
But to do this we need to experience fully the moment of burn-out, the 
moment of fire and thirst. And this the tradition does with Tisha B’Av—the 
Peeks 


208 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
ninth of the month of Av, the day that mourns for the destructions of 
the Temple (and the day set aside for the birth of Messiah, the beginning of 
redemption). 
@>> ORIGINS 
Twice the Temple was destroyed—once by order of Nebuchadnezzar, 
king of Babylon, in 586 B.C.E.—and again by Vespasian, a general of the 
Roman Empire, in 70 C.E. On neither occasion did the actual destruction 
come on the ninth of Av. The Talmud (Taanith 29a) shows that the rabbis 
(writing after the Second Destruction) were puzzled by the fact that I] Kings 
and Jeremiah give different dates for the First Destruction. One gave the 
seventh, one the tenth of Av. The rabbis insisted that the anomaly be 
cleared up and concluded that the Temple was captured by the Babylonians 
on the seventh, put to the torch on the ninth, and consumed by the fire on 
the tenth. 
The very anxiety of the rabbis to justify the date of Tisha B’Aw might be 
taken to support a theory of some modern scholars that the date was partly 
affected by the religious patterns of Babylon. Among the Babylonians, the 
ninth of Av was a day of dread and sorrow, a climactic mornent in a 
month-long celebration focused on torches and firewood. (Perhaps this 
Babylonian holy season also had to do with midsummer and a sense of the 
raging sun.) Once the Jews had gone into the Babylonian exile, in seeking to 
commemorate the day of their disaster they may have chosen the fiery day 
already set aside by the Babylonians around them—the day whose date was so 
close and whose fiery significance echoed so well with the burning of the 
Temple. 
When the Babylonian captivity ended and Jews returned to the land of 
Israel, they preserved the memorial day of Tisha B’Av—even though the 
prophet Zechariah said that God wanted them to live so justly that it could be 
made a festival of peace and joy. 
After the Second Destruction—itself on the tenth of Av—the rabbis 
went further to legitimate the date and meaning of Tisha B’Av. They looked 
far back in Jewish consciousness—back to the second year of the Israelites’ 
wandering in the wilderness after the Exodus from Egypt. They worked out a 
calendar of that year to show that on Tisha B’Av the people refused to enter 
the Land which God had promised to them. They refused in fear of the 
powerful nations that controlled the Land, a fear communicated to them by 
the spies whom they had sent to scout the territory. And as they waited in 
fear, the Holy One not only commanded that they wander in the wilderness 
for forty years till all that generation died, but said to them: “You have wept 
without cause; therefore | will set [this day] aside for a weeping throughout 
the generations to come.” 


TISHA B'AV + 209 
The rabbis added that on the ninth of Av in 135 C.E. the Romans 
captured the city of Bethar, the last stronghold of the Bar Kochba revolt 
against Rome. And on the ninth of Av one year later, Romans ploughed the 
site of the Temple so as to build there a pagan temple and a Roman city, and 
forbade Jews to enter the town that had been Jerusalem. 
All these events—even the one in the wilderness of Sinai—are con- 
nected with exile from the land—with the burning desire of the people to feel 
once more at home. But the rabbis did not view the Destruction of the 
Temple as merely a military defeat, nor even as only a political and cultural 
disaster for the Jewish people. The Shechinah—God’s very Presence—went 
into exile, they insisted. God’s own Self was shattered, and the world itself 
was riven. The Biblical book they assigned to be read on Tisha B’Av—Eichah 
or Lamentations—carries this theme into the spiritual life of the people by 
asserting that for our sins was Jerusalem destroyed. Tisha B’Av becomes a day 
not only to mourn the triumph of alienation, the loss of love and wholeness 
in the world, but to recognize our own complicity in that disaster. 
And the rabbis point up the lesson for all human beings. They take the 
word that begins the Book of Lamentations, “Eichah!—How lonely sits 
the city!” and the word that God howls out to Adam in grief and anger after 
the shattering of Eden: ‘“‘Ayeka, where are you?” These are the same word, 
they say—and indeed, in Hebrew they have the same root, only the vowels 
change. They are the same word, the rabbis say, because these two events are 
the same event. For Adam’s was the first exile, the first alienation, the 
archetype of all loss ever since: the separation of the human psyche from 
God, the loss of utterly harmonious love. It is a loss burned into our 
consciousness by the flaming swords that burn and turn to bar our way to 
Eden. 
How then do we experience this burning thirst—so fiercely as to learn 
the way to wellsprings? We learn it through a set of practices set forth by the 
tradition, beginning three weeks before Tisha B’Av and ending some seven 
weeks afterward, with Rosh Hashanah. 
@>> PREPARATION €e 
Three weeks before Tisha B’Av is the seventeenth day of the month 
Tammuz. According to the Talmud, it was the day on which the Romans 
breached the walls of Jerusalem—and about a week distant from the day on 
which the Babylonians had done the same thing six centuries earlier. So it 
was the beginning of the end. It is a partial fast day—in which the fast is in 
effect only during the daylight hours. ° 
*A similar daylight fast, instituted for a similar reason but now observed in only 
the most traditional circles, is on the tenth of Tevet. On that day in 586 B.C.E. 
the Babylonians began their siege of Jerusalem. 


210 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Just as the rabbis reached forward and backward in Jewish history to 
explain and reinforce Tisha B’Av, so they did with the seventeenth of 
Tammuz. They found that it was the date of the celebration of the golden calf 
and of Moses’ breaking the tablets of the Ten Commandments—a day in 
which Israel’s own sinfulness dominates the mood and colors history. By tying 
that tradition to the fall of Jerusalem, the rabbis reinforced the connection in 
the Jewish mind between internal failing and external defeat. 
Beginning on the seventeenth of Tammuz, weddings are avoided until 
after Tisha B’Av. So are haircuts, buying or wearing new clothes, musical 
celebrations. A general atmosphere of somberness and self-examination is 
encouraged. The atmosphere colors even the three Shabbosim of these three 
weeks, for on each of them a Prophetic passage is read that warns of the 
destruction of Jerusalem and rebukes the people for choosing a destructive 
path of life. The first two passages are Jeremiah |:1-II:3 and Jeremiah I1:4-28 
and III:4. The third—read on the Shabbat just before Tisha B’Av —is Isaiah 
I. After the initial words of the haftarah, Chazon Yeshayahu—A vision of 
Isaiah, the entire Shabbos is named Shabbos Chazon. 
The atmosphere of mourning deepens on the first day of Av. Meat and 
wine disappear from the table. Washing and bathing are forbidden, except 
when it is directly a matter of health. Shade trees are not planted. (These 
prohibitions on trees and water seem almost calculated to intensify our 
experience of the sun’s heat.) Finally, just before Tisha B’Av itself, we eat a 
meal of mourning—lentils or hard-boiled eggs, traditionally eaten in a house 
of mourning, and some uncooked fruit or vegetables, perhaps a slice of bread 
dipped in ashes. And then begins the fast. 
@» TISHA B’AV eee 
If the ninth falls on Shabbos, we postpone its observation until the next 
evening. This is clearly not just because it is a fast, for Yom Kippur is 
celebrated on Shabbos whenever the tenth of Tishri falls there. It is instead 
because this day is utterly different from Yom Kippur, the Joyful Fast. This is 
a day of deep mourning. 
Beginning at sundown, we do not eat or drink’at all; we do not wear 
leather, wash ourselves, anoint our skin or hair with oils or perfumes; we do 
not make love. And we go far beyond these prohibitions, which are the same 
as those for the Joyful Fast of Yom Kippur. We adhere to the traditional 
mourning customs because we feel almost like mourners, those whose dead 
have just been buried and who are just beginning to pray again, but sadly; 
who can share their grief with others, but not greet them; who cannot bear to 
look in a flattering mirror or sit on a comfortable chair. We study only sad 


TISHA B’AV + 2]] 
and painful passages of the Bible and Talmud: the Book of Lamentations, 
Job, the sad parts of Jeremiah’s prophecies; and commentaries on them. 
We gather in the evening to a congregation of mourners. We do not 
greet each other as we enter. The Ark of the Torah is draped in black—or left 
open, empty, stripped of its holy scrolls. There are no bright lights—only 
candles casting a dim and flickering glow. In some Sephardic and Eastern 
congregations, even these candles are put out close to the end of the service, 
so that it ends in utter darkness. We find ourselves places to sit on the floor, 
or on low benches and cushions of the kind that mourners sit on. 
We begin to chant the service in a mournful undertone. When we 
complete the murmured standing prayer, the amidah, the reading of Eichah, 
Lamentations, begins—to a limping, broken melody. In Chapter III the 
melody shifts to a more agonized howl—in keeping with the shift in content 
from public mourning to personal grief. When Eichah is finished, kinot— 
dirges—are chanted that were written in many of the later periods of anti- 
Jewish persecutions—from the Crusades, the Expulsion from Spain, pogroms 
in Eastern Europe, the Holocaust. Finally the service ends with Alenu, the 
homage to the King of Kings Who will someday be acknowledged through all 
the earth; Mourner’s Kaddish, which on this yahrtzeit day of the defenders of 
the Temple may include us all; and perhaps with the singing of Ani Ma’amin, 
the song that looks forward—wistfully—to the coming of Messiah. Finally we 
leave, perhaps with a hug or a handclasp but without a word of farewell, 
without Shalom Aleichem—again as if we were all mourners, there is a death 
in every family. 
The next morning we gather again. We do not wear tallis and t’fillin, the 
prayer shawls and leather straps-and-boxes—not out of the joy that makes 
them unnecessary on Shabbos and festivals but out of a sadness and anger 
that make them unbearable. We read from the Torah the portion of Deuter- 
onomy 4:24—40 that prophesies the Destruction, and the Prophetic portion is 
from Jeremiah 8:13-9:23. In some congregations the person called up to read 
the Torah says the broken blessing “Baruch dayan emet—Blessed be the 
Truthful Judge’—the blessing said upon hearing of a death. In some, the 
congregants sprinkle ashes on their heads. Again we read Eichah and again we 
chant kinot. Although there is no outright prohibition on work, some Jews 
follow the advice of Rabbi Akiba: “Anyone who works on Tisha B’Av will 
never see from that work any sign of blessing.” 
When we gather again in the late afternoon for the mincha service, the 
atmosphere has changed. For now the tradition comes to the fore that on this 
day of our deepest sadness, Messiah will be born and our greatest joy be 
celebrated. Now, having plunged ourselves into—and through—the deepest 
gloom, we are able to experience the first sense of joyful renewal. So—for the 
only time in all the year—we put on the tallis and ¢’fillin in the afternoon. In 
some Sephardic and Eastern communities, women put on perfume to wel- 


212 : SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
come King Messiah. We begin to sense God’s answer to the outcry at the end 
of Eichah—‘‘Hashivenu adonai eylecha, v’nashuvah; chadesh yamenu 
k’kedem—Turn us around, Lord—turn us to You and we will be returned. 
Make new our days, as they were long ago.” 
After sundown, we break the fast together, wash our faces, and then go 
outside to do the joyful service of kiddush levana—hallowing the moon. There 
are Messianic overtones to this service, which echo the tradition that in the 
days of Messiah the moon will be restored to equality with the sun—perhaps a 
hint that women, long identified with the moon, will take on an equal rank 
with men in the religious sphere. Kiddush levana may be done at any time the 
crescent moon is visible during the first half of any month, but in Av most 
communities have a strong tradition to connect it with the end of Tisha 
BAv. 
In Israel, especially since 1967 when it again became possible for Jews to 
visit the ancient site of the Temple, new customs have emerged for Tisha 
B'Av. One is that hundreds of congregations come to the Wailing Wall 
itsel(—the only remaining portion of the fortified retaining walls built by 
King Herod around the Temple Mount—to pray and chant the Tisha B’Av 
services. Another is that groups of Israelis take Tisha B’Av hikes around the 
walls of the Old City of Jerusalem, and others visit the archeological sites 
where the ancient approaches to the Temple are being uncovered. 
SONGS 
The mood of most of Tisha B’Av is too mournful to admit of music. But 
in the atmosphere of Messianic hope and determined self-renewal with which 
the day ends, three songs (the first of them from Eichah, the Book of 
Lamentations) do seem appropriate. The first two are somewhat plaintive in 
tone, the third joyous and rousing. 
Hashivenu, hashivenu, Adonai eylecha— 
V’nashuva, v’nashuva 
Chadesh, chadesh, yamenu k’kedem. 
Help us turn to You, Lord, and we will return, 
Renew our days as of old. 
Ani ma-amin, ani ma-amin ani ma-amin b’emuna sh’lema— 
B’viyat ha-mashiach, b’viat ha-mashiach ani ma-amin. 
V’af al pi sheh-yitma-meyah 
Im kol zeh ani ma-amin. 
I affirm, I affirm, I affirm with a full and firm belief 
The coming of Messiah; 


TISHA B’AV + 2]3 
And though he tarry, despite all that— 
I affirm. 
Achakeh lo, achakeh lo, achakeh lo 
B’chol yom sheh-yavo 
V’af al pi sheh-yitma-meyah, 
Im kol zeh achakeh lo! 
Achakeh lo b’chol yom sheh-yavo. 
1 will wait for him; 
Every day while he is coming, 
Despite all that I will await his coming. 
THE SEVEN WEEKS OF COMFORT 
The redemptive response to Tisha B’Av continues after the day itself. 
While the Second Temple still stood, there was a celebration that was 
observed just six days later. This was the celebration of Tu B’Av—the 
fifteenth of Av, at the full moon, exactly six months after Tu B’Shvat, the 
New Year of Trees. On this day, all the people brought firewood as an 
offering for the alrar—and they celebrated by burning bonfires and torches. It 
was considered the last day on which wood for the Temple could be chopped, 
because thereafter the sun would no longer be hot enough to dry the wood. It 
therefore also represented the turning point of the sun’s heat from scorching 
to bearable—a first hint of the revivifying autumn as Tu B’Shvat was the first 
hint of spring. On that day the maidens of Jerusalem lent each other white 
dresses—so that even if some of them had none to wear, no one would have 
to be ashamed of her poverty—and went out to dance and sing in the 
vineyards, calling out to the young men, “Lift up your eyes and see whom you 
choose for yourself.” 
The second way in which the redemptive process that begins on Tisha 
B’Av afternoon is continued and enriched is in the series of following 
Shabbosim. The Shabbos immediately following Tisha B’Av is called Shab- 
bos Nachamu—the Shabbos of Comforting—after the beginning of the 
Prophetic passage (Isaiah 11:1-26) that is read, “Nachamu, nachamu, ami— 
Comfort you, comfort you, my people.” It is the first of seven Shabbosim of 
comforting haftarahs that climb from the depths of Tisha B'Av to the renewal 
of Rosh Hashanah. All of them prophesy the redemption of Israel, its 
restoration to the Land, and the coming of the days of peace and justice. 
These seven Shabbosim echo, in a very different key, the seven weeks of 
the omer that must be counted for the Jewish people to move from the 
liberation of Pesach to the revelation of Shavuot. They echo also, at a 
different tempo, the moment on Simchat Torah when we shift from reading 
the end of the Torah—the death of Moses—to reading the beginning—the 


214 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
creation of the world. Here it takes us seven weeks to move from the 
deathday of the whole people to the birthday of the human race. In these 
seven weeks we complete the circle of the year, moving from the burning sun 
of summer to the first cool breeze of autumn. From the hot and thirsty fast of 
Tisha B’Av to the wellsprings of Hagar and Abraham, and our own visit to 
the river for Tashlich. We complete the circle, from exhaustion to new life. 
@>)> SOME NEW APPROACHES €€€® 
Several major events of the past generation have raised fresh questions 
and new possibilities in regard to Tisha B’Av. Two of these are the Holocaust 
and the emergence of the State of Israel, including its assertion of sovereignty 
over Jerusalem. On the one hand, some have argued that the mourning for 
the six million murdered Jews of Europe should be intertwined with mourning 
for the Temple. On the other hand, some have urged that Tisha B’Av 
mourning be relaxed in light of the emergence of a Jewish state in the Land of 
Israel—even in the absence of the rebuilt Temple and the Messianic Age. 
The Holocaust has had a considerable impact on forms of commemora- 
tion of Tisha B’Av. In Israel, large numbers of people wearing tennis shoes 
can be seen at Yad Vashem, the Holocaust Memorial Museum and Study 
Center, on Tisha B’Av. The tennis shoes are the badge of those who are 
eschewing leather, part of the traditional observance of the fast because 
leather was a luxury. In some American congregations, poetry about the 
Holocaust—new kinot—has been incorporated in the service. In others, the 
liturgical drama by David Roskies called Nightwords: A Midrash on the Holo- 
caust has been added to the service for Tisha B’Av night. (Nightwords is used 
in some congregations on Yom Hashoah, Holocaust Memorial Day, and is 
described at greater length in the Yom Hashoah section of Chapter XI.) 
For many congregations, however, there is a major problem in connect- 
ing the Holocaust with Tisha B’Av. The traditional Jewish outlook has been 
that for our sins the Temple was destroyed. Few Jews feel that this is true 
about the Holocaust. The tradition’s demand that we be self-critical, that we 
accept responsibility for our own failures in order to learn how to act more 
responsibly—this has one meaning when we have power, as we did in the 
First and Second Commonwealths. But did we indeed have power over our 
own lives in Eastern Europe? For these reasons, the relationship of Tisha 
B'Av to the Holocaust is not yet settled. 
In an age when large numbers of Jews and of other peoples have become 
refugees, it is possible to see both the explicit verbal content and the ritual 
practice of Tisha B’Av as ways of experiencing what it means to be a refugee. 
Hungry, thirsty, unwashed, exhausted in the heat of summer, without chairs 
to sit on or light to see by—survivors walking on the Death March to 


TISHA B'AV + 215 
Babylon, to Rome. Reminding us how it is to be a refugee as the Pesach Seder 
reminds us how it is to be a slave—and to be free. 
The emergence in the last century of a more personal and individual 
dimension to Judaism, responding to the individualism of moder civilization 
without totally surrendering to it, has also led to some new ways of experienc- 
ing Tisha B’Av. It can be seen as not only the zero point of Jewish people- 
hood, but a representation of the zero point for individuals. It can be taken as 
the occasion for individuals to re-experience their own burning sense of the 
loss of love and meaning. To feel their own bellies burn with the grief of 
knowing how they themselves have acted so as to drive away their loved 
ones, send themselves into exile from their friends, shatter loving connection 
in the world. In some chavurot (participatory congregations or fellowships), 
time has been set aside after the reading of Eichah for individuals to focus on 
their own griefs, sometimes silently and sometimes to share with others in the 
community. 
Finally, there is an aspect of Tisha B’Av that reaches out beyond the 
Jewish people. Since Tisha B’Av falls in late July or early August, it often 
comes close to or actually falls upon August 6 or August 9, the anniversaries 
in the Western calendar of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 
Several small synagogues and chavurot have treated this confluence of dates as 
an occasion to recognize the danger of world destruction. As the Temple 
symbolized the Presence of God on earth and its destruction sent God into 
exile, so the human race carries the Image of God within it—and the 
destruction of humankind would send God’s Presence into exile from the 
earth. Ceremonial acts that have accompanied the recognition of this con- 
nection have included chanting (in English, but using the mournful broken 
melodies of Eichah) passages from books describing the sufferings of Hiro- 
shima and Nagasaki. On one occasion in 1981 when Tisha B’Av actually 
coincided with Nagasaki Day, the occasion was marked by a sizeable number 
of Jews who undertook a traditional observance of Tisha B’Av while being 
present near the White House and the Soviet Embassy—buildings symbolic 
of the nuclear super-powers. 
@» GO AND STUDY «ee 
Morris Silverman and Hillel E. Silverman have compiled a booklet for 
Tishah B’Av Services (Prayer Book Press, Media Judaica, Bridgeport, CT.) 
See also The Authorized Kinot for the Ninth of Av, ed. by Abraham Rosenfeld 
(Labworth, London); Arato Osada, Children of the A-Bomb (Putnam); David 
Roskies, Nightwords (B’nai B'rith Hillel Foundations); and several Tisha 
B’Av poems useful for individual self-examination in Diane Levenberg, Out 
of the Desert (Doubleday). 


216 » SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
See esp. Midrash Rabbah on Lamentations (Soncino) and Pesikta de Rab 
Kahana (Jewish Publication Soc.), pp. 272-285 for some powerful commen- 
taries on the Destruction. 
THE LAST TISHA BPAV— 
ATCHASSIDIG]EABE ; 
To the little town of Safed, where the air is clearest and it is possible to 
see the furthest in all the Land of Israel, long ago there came a Chassid, 
visiting from Vitebsk to see his Rebbe. For his Rebbe had chosen to settle in 
the Land of Israel. 
The Chassid stood at the door of a pale and quiet synagogue: so pale, so 
quiet that the pastel paintings on its walls and ceiling stood out as though 
they were in vivid colors. 
The visitor frowned, twirled his beard, and turned to ask the Rebbe: 
“What is this painting just above the bimah? It looks like the Dome that the 
Ishmaelites, the Muslims, have built above the rock where Abraham bound 
Isaac. The giant golden Dome that they have built where stood the Temple. | 
have just come from Jerusalem . . . It looks . . .” He stopped. 
The Rebbe’s eyes turned inward. 
“I have seen. . .” he said, and paused. “I have seen. . .” he said, and 
paused again. “Our rabbis teach us that when Messiah comes, he will rebuild 
the Holy Temple in the twinkling of an eye. 
“How can this be? Messiah will be extraordinary, yet still a human being 
merely . . . But I have seen. . . Well, let me tell you: 
“At the foot of the Western Wall, the Wall where God’s Presence weeps 
and hides in exile, I have seen hundreds of thousands of Jews gathered, 
singing. Messiah has come!—and they are singing, dancing, as the Great Day 
dawns. 
“Messiah touches the Wall. He tucks one last petition between the great 
carved stones. He says a sentence to the crowds; I cannot hear it. As if his 
words have brought forth a river from the stones of the Wall, a stream of Jews 
flows up the stairway that rises to the Temple Mount. The river pauses for a 
moment on the steps, to read a wrinkled, tattered piece of paper, signed by 
the rabbis of that day. It warns all Jews to go no further, lest by accident they 
walk—God forbid—into the space set aside as the Holy of Holies. 
“Messiah looks. He reads. He laughs. He tears the sign to shreds. The 
stream of people shudders into a higher ecstasy, the flow resumes. 
“The crowd cascades from the stairway onto the great stone pavement of 
the Temple Mount. Their singing turns to the thunder of a great waterfall as 
they look toward the other end of the Mount—toward the great golden Dome 
of the Rock, the rock where Abraham bound his son for sacrifice . . 
“Surrounding the Dome are thousands of Muslims. They are not sing- 


TISHA BAV + 217 
ing. They are shouting, furious, stubborn. ‘Not here!’ they shout in unison, 
‘Not here!’ 
“You will not tear down our Holy Mosque to build your Jewish 
Temple!’ 
“ ‘But that is the place . . . No doubt, no doubt, the ancient studies tell 
us that it is the place,’ the people mutter. 
“Messiah is quiet. The sea of Jews falls to a murmuring, falls silent. They 
turn to watch him. He looks, gazes, embraces with fond eyes the Holy Space. 
His eyes move across the Dome, its golden glow, the greens and blues and 
ivories of the walls beneath it. ‘So beautiful!’ he whispers. 
“The Muslims too are silent now. The stillness here, the stillness 
there—so total that they cleave the Holy Mount in two. 
“Messiah raises one arm, slowly, slowly. The Muslims tense, lift knives 
and clubs and shake them in the stillness. The Jews tense, ready to leap 
forward with their picks and shovels. The peoples vibrate: phantom ram’s 
horns in the silent air, wailing forth a silent sob to Heaven. 
“Messiah points straight at the Dome. He speaks quietly into the utter 
quiet: “This is the Holy Temple!” 
“He drops his arm. I blink. 
“For seconds, minutes, there is not a sound. 
“Then I hear a Muslim shout and see him raise his knife: ‘No! No! You 
will not steal our Holy Mosque to make your Jewish Temple!’ 
“He throws his knife. It falls far short. No one stirs. The other Muslims 
turn to look at him. They look with steadfast eyes: no joy, no anger. They 
just keep looking. He wilts into the crowd; I can no longer see what he is 
doing. 
“Messiah steps forward, one step. Everyone, Jew and Muslim, breathes a 
breath. One Jew calls out: ‘You must not do this. You must not use their dirty 
place to be our Holy Temple. Tear it down!—We need our own, we know 
how wide and tall, it is not this!” He takes a step toward Messiah, lifts an axe 
to brandish it. 
“The man beside him reaches out a hand and takes the axe. Just takes it. 
There is a murmur, but the murmur dies. The man holds the axe level in both 
hands, walks out with it into the no-man’s-land between the crowds. He lays 
it on the pavement, backs away. 
“There is another time of quiet. Two Muslims reach out from the crowd, 
toss their knives to land next to the axe. The pause is shorter this time. Then 
on every side weapons come flying through the air to land beside the axe, 
beside the knives. There is a pile. Someone walks forward, lights a fire. The 
pile begins to burn. The flames reach up to Heaven. 
“So I have seen,” the Rebbe said, “Messiah build the Temple in the 
twinkling of an eye. And so there is this painting on the ceiling.” 
The visitor took breath again. “And why?” he said. “Why would 
Messiah do this dreadful thing?” 


218 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
The Rebbe twirled his own beard, this time. 
“First for the sake of Abraham’s two sons. 
“Second for the sake of the circles of the Dome. 
“Third for the sake of the Rock beneath the Dome. 
“And fourth for the sake of the twinkling of an eye.” 
“And why did the people burn their weapons?” 
“For the sake of the burnt offering. It is written, ‘Choose!’ You. Or the 
Temple. Or the things you use to burn each other with.” 


@> AFTERWORD AND FOREWORD €€e 
Tisha B’Av is the last link in the circle of the year—the link that moves 
from exhaustion to renewal. It is also the link in the history of the Jewish 
people that moves from disaster to renewal—from the disaster of the Destruc- 
tion of the Temple to the renewal that was the Talmud, the beginning of the 
whole period of rabbinic Jewish thought. 
And so Tisha B’Av may be for us today the model for how to move from 
our own disaster to our own renewal—from the disaster of the decline of 
Jewish tradition in the face of modern thought, and the disaster of the 
Holocaust, to the next great renewal of the Jewish people and of Torah. 
The great cycle of the Jewish year is a model, a metaphor, of the great 
cycle of life—and of the life of the Jewish people. Over and over, we move 
from birth to maturity to fulfillment to what seems to be a death—but is 
really the seed of a new birth, a new life. So it seems fitting to end this book 
with a beginning—to see that Tisha B’Av can teach us how to make a new 
beginning. 
When the Holy Temple was destroyed, the Jewish people could have 
given up. Look at the Book of Leviticus. At a surface reading it seems clear 
enough: without the Temple and its sacrifices, there is no touch with God. 
But the rabbis did not let the Torah come to nought. Instead, they did 
midrash: that is, they searched within the Torah text for deeper meaning, for 
words that would speak to a day when sacrificial animals could not be offered 
up. Study and prayer, they concluded, were a deeper sacrifice, a fuller 
contact. They found within the tradition a way to transcend the tradition. 
We all have died, we all have found new life. 
Or the rabbis could have given up another way—by keeping on. They 
could have found a new place for the sacrifices. They could have preserved a 
Biblical remnant and rejected all the elements of Hellenism. Instead, they 
absorbed the best of Hellenism and then—as who they newly were—went 
back to wrestle with the Torah. Out of that wrestling sprang new Torah- 
truths and a gigantic new interpretation of the Torah: Talmud and the whole 
rabbinic tradition. 
But they did not see the Talmud as brand-new. They saw it as what they 
called the oral Torah, the spoken words that lay invisible between the lines of 
the written Torah, the words that Moses heard on Sinai and passed by word 
of mouth to all the generations. So for them the Talmud did not replace 
Torah; the Talmud was Torah. The new truths were old truths waiting to be 
unveiled when the time came. 
Or the rabbis could have taken the Destruction of the Temple as a 
- 219 - 


220 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
merely military fact: “It was a building. It was burnt by an invading army. 
The Hellenists have gained in strength. Once before, when they called 
themselves ‘Greece,’ they defiled the building. We raised an army and we 
threw them out. Then we rededicated the building. Now they call themselves 
‘Rome,’ and they are stronger. This time they actually burned the building. 
We will rebuild it when we throw them out again.” 
They did not do that either. Instead they made the Destruction a cosmic 
fact: “The Shechinah, God’s Presence in the world, has fled into exile. The 
world itself is shattered, alienated.” We mourn on Tisha B’Av not a military 
defeat, but our deep alienation from the flow of life. And if our mourning can 
be deep enough, our tears flow free enough, then we can touch the flow 
again, pour our tears into the stream. Our alienation begins to end. Messiah 
is born. 
From the darkness of our mourning comes the night vision, the dream, 
welling up from our unconscious, of new life. From the blankness, empty 
white space that surrounds the letters of the Torah, from that fluidity and 
openness, comes new direction. It is not empty blankness, but white fire 
around the black fire of the letters. From the tiny crowns and thorns upon the 
letters—at once so precise and so meaningless—come whole worlds, whole 
worlds of meaning. The oral Torah. 
The Beit-Mikdash, the Holy Temple, was a beit, a letter of the aleph-beit. 
It was the beit of B’reshit, “In the beginning,” the letter that begins the Holy 
Torah. 
But the Temple, the Beit-Mikdash, was no ordinary beit. It was no 
two-dimensional letter written down on parchment, but a four-dimensional 
letter. For the Holy Temple existed in three dimensions of space and also in 
the time-dimension, expressed through the sacrificial calendar of holy days. 
When the Temple burned, when the beit went up in fire, the flames 
were crowns and thorns upon the letter: white flame from which sprang 
old-new Torah. When the Temple space stood empty, there was blankness. 
The rabbis turned the blankness into white fire, new Torah. 
On the supernal heights of Sinai, above the earthly heavens, how did 
Moses distinguish the forty days and forty nights? During the day God taught 
him written Torah: visible, definite, organized, chronological, and logical. 
At night a dreaming God taught a dreaming Moses oral Torah: invisible, 
fluid, anarchic, psychological. Dreamlike. 
For centuries the oral Torah remained a Dream. But then the Holy 
Temple burned. On Tisha B’Av we became our own psychoanalysts, we did 
our own interpretation of dreams. We turned our Dream, our Nightmare, 
into our waking Life-Path. We turned what was fluid and dreamy into 
specifics: Halacha. 
What Messiah was born that Tisha B’Av? On the day the Temple was 


AFTERWORD AND FOREWORD - ??] 
destroyed, the Exile was born and the Talmud was born. One became the 
body and the other the soul of the old-new Jewish people. 
Now, today, as earlier Jews were conquered by Hellenism, so we have 
been conquered by Modernism. Not only conquered from without, by physi- 
cal force—but more important, conquered inwardly. Persuaded. 
There are attractions, truths, in Modernism as there were in Hellenism. 
There are truths to science, industrialism, liberalism, socialism, nationalism. 
Their central truth is that the human race can master its destiny, master the 
world. But it is only a partial truth. We are persuaded—but not wholly. It is 
also true that acting with total mastery will destroy our dominion—and thus 
annul, annihilate, our mastery. Acting totally as masters will total the world. 
Objectify Earth, she will objectify us. 
Poison the world, she will poison us back. 
So we have become Modernists who know another truth: that to be only 
Modernists will destroy the world and ourselves. We need God-given Torah: 
the knowledge that we do not own the world. God does. There must be 
limits. There must be cycles. There must be pauses—Shabbos and Jubilee. 
So we need to wrestle with Torah as the rabbis wrestled with Torah. As 
they searched in the white flame for new understanding, so must we. As they 
plunged into the darkness and the blankness to grasp the oral Torah, so must 
we. As they turned the Destruction from a military or a cultural event into a 
cosmic event, sO must we. 
But not—as some theologians would have it—the cosmic event that 
ends the covenant between God and Israel. Instead, the cosmic event that 
demands we renew the covenant in some new way. Not Sinai, but the 
burning bush: the flame that marks both outcry and response. 
How do we know this? Because in our generation, the victory of 
Modernism brought disaster, but not only disaster. The victory of Modernism 
took three forms: the disaster of the Holocaust, the blessing of the state of 
Israel, and the blessing of the free American Diaspora. These simultaneous 
upheavals of hope and hopelessness should signal us: human mastery is not 
utterly evil, not wholly good. The covenant is not utterly dead, not wholly 
alive. It all depends on us. It is we who will have to search for God. It is we 
who will have to find new Torah. 
We can learn from Tisha B’Av what we can do. 
Through Tisha B’Av, the rabbis simultaneously faced the death and 
celebrated the rebirth of the Biblical era. They did this not only by what they 
said of Tisha B’Av—that it was both a day of disaster and a day of extraordi- 
nary birth, Messiah’s birth. It was also by doing Tisha B’Av. For by mourning 
the Temple with such sorrow, they were accepting the death of the whole 
Biblical pattern in which the Jewish people lived freely in its own land and 
sacrificed to God the products of that land in its own Holy Temple. Yet by 


222 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
the very act of mourning on Tisha B’Av the rabbis were incorporating the 
content and process of the Biblical era into something new. To moum a death 
is always to assert a rebirth: the dead do not mourm. 
What is born on this day? When the rabbis say Messiah is born on Tisha 
B’Av, one way to hear them is that hope is reborn. For they speak of 
Messiah’s birth, not of fullness, not of the shattered world made whole again, 
but only of a birth, a beginning, a hope. 
If we wish to learn from Tisha B'Av, we can face the “death” of the 
Talmudic era in its age-old form. And by doing this we can preserve its seed, 
bring it to birth again. If in the generation of the Temple's Destruction what 
was “born” was the Diaspora and the Talmud, then we must notice that in 
our own generation what has already been bor is both the State of Israel and 
a free Diaspora. What was bor in this generation is the new Jewish people 
who lives both in Diaspora and the Land of Israel, with political power and 
freedom in both places; a new Jewish people that is both secularist and 
religious. 
What is yet to be born in this generation? A new path of Jewish life, a 
new dream-Torah that can transform our daily practice, that can preserve a 
seed from the Biblical era, preserve a seed from the Talmudic era, embody the 
new Jewish secularism, and go beyond them by continuing the Torah process. 
If we wish to learn from Tisha B'Av we can read Eichah, the Book of 
Lamentations. We can read with joy the verse of Lamentations: “Chadesh 
yamenu k’kedem. Make new our days as of old.” Make new the days of the 
year, as we circle back to Rosh Hashanah. Make new the generations of our 
people, as we circle forward to the Third Age of Jewish peoplehood. Not 
“Give us back the good old days,” but “Make our days full of newness, as You 
did long ago.” 


FROM GENERATION 
TO GENERATION 
Today, as I complete this book, is perhaps the strangest of all the seasons 
of our joy—for it will not come again for twenty-eight years. It is the day of 
the Blessing of the Sun—Birchat Ha-Chamah. On that day, according to the 
Talmud, the sun returns to where it was in the Heavens on the fourth day of 
Creation. That was when God set the sun and the moon to “serve as signs for 
the seasons.” (Gen. 1:14). So today it is in a sense the season of the seasons, 
the cycle of the birth of all our cycles. 
Why today? Because alongside the view that the Creation of the World 
occurred in Elul and Tishri, at Rosh Hashanah time, the Talmud preserves 
another view: that the Creation occurred in Nisan, the first of the months, in 
spring. Evidently to the rabbis it felt particularly apppropriate that the 
birthday of the sun should be at the spring equinox, when the sun emerges 
from the womb of winter and crosses the Equator coming northward. The 
Torah teaches that the sun was created at the beginning of the fourth 
day—Tuesday evening, to use our present labels. So the moment when the 
sun is again where it was at the beginning comes in a year when the 
equinox—as the rabbis defined it—comes on Tuesday evening in Nisan. 
Then why are we celebrating today—the eighth of April? Surely it is not 
the equinox! The rabbis’ calculation of the length of the year was a few 
minutes off—and in 2,000 years that has added up to a few weeks. 
And why only every twenty-eight years? By assigning Tuesday evening 
as the moment, the rabbis made the moment hard to come by. For the year 
does not divide into four equal seasons of full days. There is a day-and-a- 
quarter left over. So if the equinox comes on a Tuesday evening this year, it 
will come next year a day-and-a-quarter later. It will take four years for it to 
come ’round to the evening again—and then it will be five days away from 
Tuesday. Only after seven times four years will the moment come back to a 
Tuesday evening. 
By working out this cycle of twenty-eight years, the rabbis accomplished 
something else: by celebrating the sun only once a generation, they gave us a 
way to look ahead and look back that is worthy of the sun. Of all the specific 
objects in our created world, the sun and planet Earth are the most crucial for 
the life and well-being of the human race. So a celebration of the sun’s 
creation is a good moment to ask ourselves: what have we done with the sun’s 
light, warmth, energy, in this past generation? What do we intend to do in 
the next generation? 
So this morning at 5:43 a.m., at sunrise, at the Jefferson Memorial on 
the shores of the Tidal Basin in Washington, under the windy, tattered 
cherry blossoms, several hundred Jews recited “Baruch atah Adonai eloheynu 
EPPS Te 


224 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
melech ha-olam oseh ma-aseh b’reshit. Blessed are You, Lord our God, Ruler 
of time and space, Doer of the deeds of Creation.” And danced in circles, 
sang songs like “Here Comes the Sun” and “Morning Has Broken” and 
psalms about the sun, rising in strength and joy and radiance like a bride- 
groom coming forth to his wedding. 
And we signed a scroll to be saved for the Blessing of the Sun in the year 
5769 of the Creation, on April 8, 2009: 
In this day that begins the 206th cycle of the sun since the Beginning, 
We pledge ourselves to make a new beginning: 
To hand on to the next generation an earth that is washed in sunlight, 
not poisoned by waste; 
To see in the sun’s light the light of Torah; 
To feel in the sun’s warmth the warmth of the human community; 
To use through the sun’s energy the strength of the One Who Creates. 
Blessed be the Doer of Deeds of Beginning. 
And we sent greetings to Jews at the top of the Empire State Building, in 
front of Independence Hall, on the shores of the Atlantic in New England 
and in Florida, at Golden Gate Bridge and in the Redwood Forest, in the 
prison yard at Attica and at the Wall in Old Jerusalem, who were also joining 
in Our prayers. 
I would like to end this book with that look back and forward. When the 
sun was blessed twenty-eight years ago, there were far fewer Jews who knew 
about this festive day or took joy in doing it. The renewal of our tradition has 
been one of the great works of this past generation. It is still beginning, still 
gathering strength. May the renewal of Jewish peoplehood and Torah be so 
strong that in 2009 this whole book needs to be rewritten: rewritten out of a 
deeper and broader understanding of the festivals, out of a more profound 
mourning for what is gone in Jewish life and a more intense joy in what is 
growing, out of new ceremonies and studies that grow authentically from 
wrestling with the old ones. 
In my own life and wrestling, | have had teachers and comrades in the 
inner work that lay behind the working of this book: 
Michele Alperin, Brad Blanton, Everett Gendler, Lynn Gottlieb, Liz 
Lerman, Diane Levenberg, Jeff Oboler, Rosalie Riechman, Zalman 
Schachter-Shalomi, Carol Simon, Esther Ticktin, Max Ticktin, David 
Waskow, Howard Waskow, Shoshana Waskow, and Rena Yount. Two 
of these people, Max Ticktin and Zalman Schachter-Shalomi, for years 
and years have been for me extraordinary teachers of Torah and 
menshlichkeit. 


FROM GENERATION TO GENERATION : 225 
For specific contributions to one or another particular aspect of the 
book, I thank Richard Siegel and Joelle Delbourgo for encouraging me to 
write it; my son, David Waskow, for compiling the dates in Appendix V; my 
mother, Hannah Waskow, for supplying almost all the recipes (after some 
consultation with her mother, Rose Gertz); Rose Sue Berstein, for providing 
the vegetarian Pesach recipes; Joan Benjamin-Farren and Martin Farren for 
the illustrations; Joan Matthews and Judy Davis for turning my multi-colored 
scrawl into a manuscript; Jacob Agus, Carol Simon, and Max Ticktin for 
reading and criticizing large parts of it; and Nessa Rapoport for a tough, 
sensitive, and sensible job of editing. 
My work during the last few years as editor of Menorah, a monthly 
journal of Jewish renewal, has helped me feel out how to respond to the 
Jewish community’s sense of the festival cycle. One of Menorah’s main 
concerns is to renew and enrich these celebrations. | would welcome readers 
of this book as subscribers, writers, and artists for Menorah. 
I also welcome readers into a conversation of shylahs and tshuvas, 
questions and responses, about the meaning of the holy days and seasons. 
Please write me at New Menorah, 6711 Lincoln Drive, Philadelphia, PA 
19119, with your questions, comments, and responses. 
My life in Fabrangen, a Washington chavurah or participatory communal 
congregation that has now for ten years taught me and engaged me in the 
cycle of the seasons, made the book possible. My discussions with the students 
in several years of classes at the Fabrangen’s Jewish Study Center made the 
book far richer. 
I remain responsible for its mistakes, its wanderings, and _ its 
transgressions. 
L’hit-ra-ot—till we may see the sun once more together, in the joyful 
season of its cycle. 
Avraham Yitzchak Yishmael ben Chanoch v’Chana 
Rabbi Arthur O. Waskow 
4 Nisan 5741 
April 8, 1981 
On the first day of the 
206th cycle ot the 
sun since the Creation. 


(o> APPENDIX I eg 
THE SECOND DAY 
OF FESTIVALS 
All the festivals but one require that the night of the New Moon of their 
month be firmly established. (The one exception is Shavuot, which is dated 
by counting fifty days from the second day of Pesach.) But the astronomy 
available to the Jews during the Temple period and the early Talmudic period 
(up to the fourth century C.E.) did not permit being absolutely certain, in 
advance, of when the New Moon would actually appear. Sometimes it 
appeared twenty-nine days after the previous one; sometimes thirty. Its actual 
appearance was what mattered, and witnesses had to appear before a court to 
testify they had seen it. 
In the days when the Temple stood, the Sanhedrin in Jerusalem would 
near testimony and proclaim the new month. Then special torches were lit 
amd ceremonially waved on the mountaintops, sending the news from one 
hill to another as well as ritually celebrating the New Moon. By this means 
the word quickly reached even the Diaspora in Babylonia. But there was 
growing animosity between the official Jewish community and the Samar- 
itans, who had an independent sacrificial rite; and the Samaritans began to 
light torches on other nights in such a way as to confuse the far-flung Jewish 
communities. 
As 2 result, the Diaspora Jews began to observe Rosh Chodesh—the 
New Moon—on both days on which it might occur. And of necessity they 
began co celebrate two days of festival—two days of Rosh Hashanah, which 
wmdeed came on the new moon itself; two days of rest at the beginning of 
Sukkot, two days of Sh’mini Atzeret at its end; two days of rest at the 
beginning and two at the end of Pesach; and two days of Shavuot. The other 
holidays—Hanukkah, Purim, etc., which did not require rest—were not 
doubled; and Yor Kippur was not because it would be too hard to impose a 
total fast for forty-eight hours. 
Some have suggested that since the second day arose out of doubts over 
the correct date, the second day can be seen as a day to celebrate and honor 
doubt and skepticism—as the first day honors faith and certainty. The 
deepest faith can arise only after we have faced all our doubts. 
Even when Jewish astronomy became expert enough to know in advance 
when the New Moon would appear, the distinction between the Palestinian 
community and the Diaspora was preserved and the custom of the forebears 
“226 * 


APPENDIX | + 227 
was honored by continuation of the two-day celebration in the Diaspora 
alongside the one-day celebration in Palestine. 
The two-day celebration of Rosh Hashanah, however, took on a special 
aspect. The rabbis agreed that the two days should be treated as one long day 
for various legal purposes. Rosh Hashanah was probably felt to be exceptional 
because it was the only festival that fell on the New Moon itself, and so the 
uncertainty was especially strong. Perhaps as a result, when a large group of 
Jews from Provence (the Mediterranean coast of what is now France) settled 
in Palestine in the eleventh century, they insisted on celebrating Rosh 
Hashanah for two days. Their numbers were great enough, their prestige high 
enough, and their insistence strong enough that they swallowed up the 
one-day Rosh Hashanah that had been practiced by Jews in Palestine; and 
the result was that for all Jews everywhere Rosh Hashanah became a two-day 
festival. (It may be that an underlying desire to celebrate the day of doubt as 
well as the day of certainty and faith helped bring this result; or even that the 
desire to hear the shofar blown on Rosh Hashanah was so great that a two-day 
celebration seemed a good way to make the shofar blowing possible if one day 
of Rosh Hashanah fell on Shabbos, when the shofar is not blown.) 
In the past generation, Reform Judaism formally annulled the second 
day of the festivals in the Diaspora (and many Conservative Jews grew weaker 
in observing the second day). The Reform decision applied even to Rosh 
Hashanah, though many Reform synagogues continue to observe both days of 
Rosh Hashanah. 
As visits between the Diaspora and the modern Israeli Jewish cornmuni- 
ties became more frequent, it became necessary to define the personal 
obligations of individual Jews. The general rule is that Diaspora Jews who are 
visiting Israel but have not decided to move there should celebrate both days; 
and Israelis who are visiting in the Diaspora observe the second day when 
they are in company, so as not to cause a scandal or controversy over the 
legitimacy of the second day. 


fos APPENDIX II 4 
THE MOON 
Since this book focuses on the cycle of the year and the changing 
seasons of the year, we have addressed the changing festivals that celebrate 
these seasons. But in any Jewish year, there are also the undertones brought 
out by shorter rhythms. In the context of the year, these rhythms emphasize 
repetition rather than change. 
The first of these is the rhythm of the day—with its prayer times at 
dawn, afternoon, at dusk, and (privately) on going to bed. These four seasons 
of the day may be analogous to the four seasonal festivals of the year and of 
the month of Tishri—with the bedtime saying of the Sh’ma almost invisible, 
like Sh’mini Atzeret. 
The second is the rhythm of the week, crowned by Shabbos—the 
seventh day, over and over and over the seventh day, the day of rest that 
celebrates both God’s rest in the creation of the universe and the repose of 
free men and women when they break out of slavery. Since Shabbos is not 
marked by any special change of the sun, moon, or earth, it depends entirely 
on the human act of counting and the human will to observe it. 
The third is the rhythm of the moon. We have seen that Jewish 
tradition treats the seventh month with great distinction; but the coming of 
every month is celebrated specially. On the Shabbos before Rosh Chodesh, 
head of the moon-renewing, the day of Rosh Chodesh is announced with 
great fanfare during the Torah service, and the congregation asks God to 
make the new month one of life—life for blessing and joy and peace. If that 
Shabbos happens to be the day just before Rosh Chodesh, a special haftarah is 
read that recounts the love and friendship between David and Jonathan, how 
they made a covenant together on the eve of Rosh Chodesh, and then had to 
part forever because of King Saul’s hostility toward David (I Samuel 20:18— 
42). 
Some traditional Jews treat the day before Rosh Chodesh as a small Yom 
Kippur, when they fast and consciously turn away from their misdeeds. This 
custom arose among the mystics of Safed in the sixteenth century, who saw 
the waning of the moon as a symbol of the exile of the Shechinah (God’s 
Presence in the world) and of the alienated, shattered state of human and 
cosmic existence. Rosh Chodesh for them was a symbol of renewal and hope. 
Then on Rosh Chodesh itself, the day becomes a minor festival. In the 
amidah prayer, a paragraph is inserted like that on the festivals; and the same 
kind of partial Hallel is sung that is chanted on the later days of Pesach. 
“225° 


APPENDIX Il + 229 
Among traditional Jews, women did not work on Rosh Chodesh. The 
folklore says that God gave them this special gift as a reward for refusing to 
worship the golden calf at Sinai. This legend may be a way of recognizing an 
ancient special relationship between women and the moon arising out of the 
similarity of the lunar and menstrual cycles, or even out of comparing the 
lesser light of the moon and the paler, less assertive role assigned women by 
Jewish tradition. 
In recent years, American Jewish women who are specially interested in 
encouraging the full and equal participation of women in Jewish religious life 
and who also want to infuse the tradition with the spiritual experience of 
women have developed a number of ceremonies for the celebration of Rosh 
Chodesh by women in separate groups, and sometimes by women and men 
together. These ceremonies have included the lighting of a candle set afloat 
on cork or wood in a bowl of water, the chanting and telling of old and new 
midrash about women in the Bible, and the weaving of new and old feelings 
and expectations about the tone of the month that is beginning. 
Some women have suggested viewing as a parable of the history of roles 
and relationships of women and men, the Talmudic legend that God origi- 
nally made the sun and moon equal in light, reduced the moon to secondary 
status but viewed it as a misdeed to have done so, and promised that in the 
future the moon would again become equal to the sun. In this orientation, 
Rosh Chodesh becomes a renewal both of God’s Presence in the world—the 
Shechinah, a female aspect of God—and of the female side of the human race 
and the human soul. 
When Rosh Chodesh itself falls on Shabbos, to the regular Torah 
portion of the week is added a recitation of Numbers 28:9-15, about the 
sacrifices offered on Rosh Chodesh when the Temple stood. The regular 
haftarah is replaced by Isaiah 66, which evokes images of God as a Mother 
bearing and suckling Her child Israel and concludes: 
And it will come to pass 
That New Moon after New Moon 
And Shabbos after Shabbos, 
All flesh will come to worship before Me, 
Says the Lord. 
Shortly after Rosh Chodesh there is a traditional ceremony for kiddush 
levana, hallowing the moon. In the month of Tishri, this is usually done in 
the evening after Yom Kippur (the beginning of the eleventh of Tishri); in 
Av, on the evening after Tisha B’Av (the beginning of the tenth of Av). In 
the other months, it is done anytime between the fourth of the month, when 
the moon is clearly perceptible, and the fourteenth, when it appears full. The 
hallowing of the moon is always done outdoors, and only if the moon can 
actually be seen. 


230 - SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
This ceremony was also developed by the Kabbalists of Safed, and 
explicitly mentions their hope that the moon will be renewed in the future to 
be as bright as the sun. 
Blessed are You, Lord our God, King of the universe, who created the 
heavens by your command, and all their host by Your mere word. You 
have subjected them to fixed laws and time, so that they might not 
deviate from their set function. They are glad and happy to do the will 
of their Creator, the true Author, whose achievement is truth. He 
ordered the moon to renew itself as a glorious crown over those He 
sustained from birth, who likewise will be regenerated in the future, 
and will worship their Creator for his glorious majesty. Blessed are You, 
O Lord, who renews the months. 
Blessed be your omnipotent Creator, O moon! 
Even as one cannot touch the moon, so may my foes be unable to 
harm me. 
May terror and dread fall on them; may they be motionless as a 
stone under the sweep of your arm. 
Long live David, king of Israel! 
The worshippers exchange greetings: 
Shalom aleichem, peace be with you! 
Aleichem shalom, peace be unto you! 
May we and all Israel have a favorable omen and good fortune. 
Amen. 
The voice of my beloved! Here he comes, leaping across the 
mountains, bounding over the hills! My beloved is like a gazelle, like a 
young deer; here he stands, behind our wall, gazing through the 
windows, peering through the lattice. 
This, and also the reference to King David, forebear and model of 
Messiah who is yet to come, and the passage from the Song of Songs all evoke 
the hope of the Messianic days of peace, justice, and spiritual wholeness. 


feos APPENDIX Ill Key 
GLOSSARY 
amidah standing prayer, quietly murmured, that is part of each daily service. 
bensch say a blessing; over the lulav, or over food, etc. 
bokser carob. 
bub chickpeas. 
chavurah (chavurot) lit. fellowship(s); small and intimate participatory con- 
gregations or study groups, free-standing or part of a synagogue, creatively 
traditional, egalitarian between women and men and the learned and 
learning. 
chevra friendship group, smaller and less formal than chavurah (same root). 
chol hamoed ordinary part of the festival—days in middle of Pesach or Sukkot 
when work is allowed. 
Diaspora the widespread network of Jewish communities outside the Land of 
Israel. 
dreidl spinning top for playful Hanukkah gambling; Yiddish for s’vivon. 
etrog citron fruit for use in Sukkot ceremony. 
Fabrangen name of a chavurah in Washington, DC; modification of far- 
brangen, a coming together of Chassidim to hear their rebbe teach Torah. 
Gemara vast body of rabbinic commentary on the Mishnah, edited and 
brought together into an authoritative text by fifth century C.E.; together 
with the Mishnah, makes up the Talmud. 
haftarah Prophetic passage read on a given Shabbos or festival. 
hak-heyl assemble-ceremony of reading parts of Torah every seventh Sukkot. 
hakkafah circle-dance (one circuit) with the Torah scroll. 
Hallel a group of Psalms chanted as special praise of God. 
Hoshanah chant of “Save us, Lord,” said while carrying Torah in procession. 
Jubilee every fiftieth year, land lies fallow and land ownership is totally 
redistributed into equal family shares. 
Kaddish blessing of God’s powers and attributes in a prayer used for internal 
punctuation of prayer services into various parts, and also used as a memorial 
prayer for the dead. 
Kapparot ceremony of transferring sinfulness to a scapegoat just before Yom 
Kippur. 
ketubah (ketubot)—written contract(s) of marriage. 
kibbutz highly participatory, unbureaucratic collective farm (in Israel), with 
shared income and voluntary membership. 
kiddush blessing over wine used to hallow a holy day; by extension, a light 
meal after the wine. 
kinah (kinot)—poetic dirge(s). 
kittel white robe. 
kvitl(ech) petitionary prayer(s) on pieces of paper tucked between stones of 
Western (Wailing) Wall in Jerusalem. 
ut 40 Nae: 


232 + SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
latke pancake (Yiddish). 
Levites tribe of ceremonial-religious functionaries. 
lulav palm branch, bound with willow and laurel for Sukkot ceremony. 
Machzor prayerbook for Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur (and sometimes 
other festivals). 
maftir last part of Torah reading on a given Shabbos or festival. 
maoz chittin wheat money—charitable gifts at Pesach so the poor can buy 
matzah. 
Maariv evening prayer service. 
megillah scroll; esp. (Megillah) the Scroll of Esther; by extension, any long 
story. 
menschlichkeit decent human behavior. 
midrash the search for deeper meaning in some text of Jewish tradition, 
which may lead to a reinterpretation that itself becomes part of the tradi- 
tion. 
mikveh pool of water for ceremonial immersion. 
Minchah afternoon prayer service. 
Mishnah law code governing all aspects of life, based on Pharisees’ and rabbis’ 
interpretation of Torah; codified in second century C.E. 
mitzvah command from God; a good deed. 
musaf _ additional prayer service for Shabbos and festival days. 
nahit chickpeas. 
Neilah closing of the gates service at end of Yom Kippur. 
omer sheaf or bushel of grain. 
parah adumah __ red heifer—special sacrificial animal. 
payot corners; therefore, earlocks of hair. 
Pharisees religio-political faction in late Second Temple days that wanted to 
develop Judaism through prayer, study of Torah, and midrashic interpreta- 
tion of Torah; forerunners of the rabbis. 
pryyut poetic prayer. 
Purimshpiel parodic play for Purim. 
Rosh Chodesh New Moon, first day of month. 
Sadducees religio-political faction in late Second Temple days that focused 
on priestly functions and the sacrificial system. 
schnapps whiskey. 
Shabbos, Shabbat Sabbath. 
Shacharit morning prayer service. 
shalom the fullness of peace and harmony. 
Shechinah God’s Presence in the world—among mystics, seen as female 
aspect of God in relation to male distant, transcendent aspect of God. 
shmitah release—the seventh year in which the land lies fallow and debts are 
released or annulled. 
shofar ram’s horn, blown to make an eerie sound. 
shul synagogue. 
Siddur prayerbook. 
S'phirah (S’phirot) emanation(s) from the ultimate, infinite, indefinable God- 
head toward the palpable world; aspects of God. 
sufganiyot doughnuts. 
sukkah leaky-roofed hut. 
s’vivon spinning top for playful Hanukkah gambling; Hebrew for dreidl. 


APPENDIX Ill + 233 
Ta-anit a section of the Talmud on Fasts. 
tallit, tallis prayer shawl with ceremonial fringes on four corners. 
tallit katan small prayer shawl; a special undershirt with four corners each 
bearing tzitzit. 
Talmud vast collection of rabbinic thought, stories, law, etc., from the 
period 200 B.C.E. to 500 C.E. 
Tashlich casting; ceremonial casting of crumbs into water on Rosh Hashanah. 
tikkun repair; the all-night Torah study on Shavuot that repairs the world. 
Torah (1) the Five Books of Moses; (2) the whole process and content of all 
of Jewish tradition; (3) lit., teaching. 
tshuvah turning; repentance, turning one’s life back toward God and holi- 
ness. 
tzaddik(im) righteous person(s). 
tzedakah righteous action toward the poor; obligatory charity. 
tzitzit ceremonially knotted fringes to be worn on all four-cornered garments. 
ushpizin guests, especially mystical guests in the sukkah. 
yetzer impulse; yetzer ha-ra, impulse toward evil. 
yizkor memorial service for the dead. 
Zohar Splendor—a thirteenth-century mystical text. 


<= APPENDIX IV eS 
GO AND STUDY 
When someone asked the great teacher Hillel to teach him the whole 
Torah while he stood on one foot, Hillel said, ‘‘ ‘Love your neighbor as 
yourself.’ This is the whole Torah. Everything else is midrash—commentary. 
Go and study!” The hasty learner was, for the moment, satisfied—but Hillel’s 
answer was something of a put-on. “Go and study!” means, “Spend the rest of 
your life at it.” For indeed everything else—everything else—is midrash on the 
Torah, waiting to be connected and understood anew in Torah’s light. 
Therefore: go and study! Most of the best study of the festivals comes 
from experiencing and observing them, and observing yourself while you 
experience them. But reading helps. The books noted below are those I have 
found most useful in my own study, in addition to those noted at the-end of 
every chapter. All are in English. 
ULTIMATE SOURCES 
The Torah (Jewish Publication Society) has the basic commandments for 
the most ancient festivals. Chumashim (the Five Books of Moses divided into 
Shabbos and festival sections, with the connected Prophetic haftarahs, all in 
Hebrew and English) are especially useful for our purposes if they present the 
festival readings in a clear way. The best along those lines is the J. H. Hertz 
chumash, The Pentateuch and Haftarahs (Soncino, London); see especially pp. 
943-1043. The translations are archaic, and the Hertz chumash might best be 
used with the newer translations of The Torah and The Prophets (Jewish 
Publication Society) in the other hand. When the Everett Fox retranslation 
of the Torah is available from Schocken Books, it will be an extraordinary 
advance. 
The Five Megillot and Jonah (Jewish Publication Society) has excellent 
introductions to each of these extra readings for the holidays, each presented 
in Hebrew and English, all in an unusually attractive format at little cost. 
Herbert Danby, ed., The Mishnah (Oxford University Press), pp. 99-216, has 
many rich passages on the festivals in Second Temple days. 
The Talmud has comments on the holy days scattered all through it; but 
by far the most of these are concentrated in Seder Moed, the large section 
devoted to the festivals and seasons. In the English edition (Soncino, Lon- 
don), this is four volumes totalling more than 3,600 pages. It rewards both 
browsing and intense study. 
- 234 + 


APPENDIX IV + 235 
Of rabbinical midrash, one classic collection available in English is 
organized in such a way as to help in study of the festivals, because it follows 
the Torah readings, for festivals and festival-related Shabbosim, in order from 
Hanukkah around the circle of the year to Sh’mini Atzeret. This is Pesikta de 
Rab Kahana, ed. by William G. Braude and Israel J. Kapstein (Jewish 
Publication Society). Its quality is very high. 
The abridged version of the Shulchan Aruch now available in English, 
the Code of Jewish Law, ed. by Solomon Ganzfried, transl. by Hyman E. 
Goldin (Hebrew Publishing Co.) is useful for a bare-bones outline of Ortho- 
dox practice in Eastern Europe and its American transplants during the past 
century. 
I have found two Siddurim or prayerbooks (in Hebrew and English) most 
useful for the festivals: David de Sola Pool, The Traditional Prayer Book for 
Sabbath and Festivals (Behrman House), with exceptionally beautiful transla- 
tions, clear explanations, and the festival Torah and haftarah readings; and 
Philip Birnbaum, Daily Prayer Book: Ha-Siddur Ha-Shalem (Hebrew Pub- 
lishing Company), with an extraordinary coverage of special festival services 
and prayers that are sometimes ignored. 
MODERN INTERPRETATIONS * 
For me, the two most thought-provoking interpretive books on the 
festivals have been Theodore Gaster’s historically/anthropologically oriented 
work, Festivals of the Jewish Year (Morrow) and the section on the theology of 
the festivals in Franz Rosenzweig’s Star of the Redemption (Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston), pp. 265-335. Eliyahu Kitov’s The Book of Our Heritage (Feldheim, 
3 vols.) is very rich in both details of practice and midrashic interpretation, 
in presenting the pattern for Orthodox celebration of the festivals. David 
Rosenberg’s Chosen Days, with art work by Leonard Baskin (Doubleday) is a 
fusion of explicit interpretive comment with interpretation that is implicit in 
his poetic and midrashic renderings of some of the major readings for the 
festivals. 
Hayyim Schauss, The Jewish Festivals from Their Beginnings to Our Own 
Day (Union of American Hebrew Congregations) and Bella Chagall’s Bum- 
ing Lights (Schocken) with drawings by Marc Chagall, are both helpful in 
giving a rich description of the celebration of the festivals in Eastern Europe 
and (in Schauss) other eras of Jewish life. 
Many many entries and essays in the Encyclopedia Judaica were very 
helpful. So were a number of articles in The First Jewish Catalog, ed. by 
Richard Siegel, Michael Strassfeld, and Sharon Strassfeld (Jewish Publica- 
tion Society). 
Very interesting, but less useful for me, were Julius Greenstone, Jewish 


236 +« SEASONS OF OUR JOY 
Feasts and Fasts (Jewish Publication Society), Yaacov Vainstein, The Cycle of 
the Jewish Year (World Zionist Organization), and Abraham P. Bloch, The 
Biblical and Historical Background of the Jewish Holy Days (Ktav). Alex J. 
Goldman’s A Handbook for the Jewish Family: Understanding and Enjoying the 
Sabbath and Holidays (Bloch) might be useful chiefly for its songs, since they 
are supplied with musical notation. 
The Festival Anthology series of the Jewish Publication Society, whose 
individual volumes on Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, Passover, etc., | have 
mentioned in specific chapters, could be of great help to anyone planning a 
celebration of the festivals. So could the series of Festival Guides by Irving 
Greenberg, pamphlets published by the National Jewish Resource Center in 
New York City. 
Extraordinary tape recordings of chants, songs, stories, and interpretive 
remarks on some of the festivals by Zalman Schachter-Shalomi are available 
from B'nai Or in Philadelphia. 
Two cookbooks are organized according to the festival cycle, and con- 
tain dozens of good recipes: Fanny Engle and Gertrude Blair, The Jewish 
Festival Cookbook (Paperback Library) and Joan Nathan, The Jewish Holiday 
Kitchen (Schocken). 
Continuing articles on reinterpretations of and new ways of celebrat- 
ing the holy seasons are carried by New Menorah, the journal of Jewish 
renewal that I edit. I have often referred to chavurot, the intimate and 
participatory congregations or fellowships that are developing many new 
approaches to the festivals. My books Godwrestling (Schocken) and These 
Holy Sparks (Harper & Row) describe the process and content of the 
chavurot in depth. 
Since 1981, when I finished writing the first edition of Seasons, 
several important books have become available to those who wish to “go 
and study.” Gunther Plaut’s annotated edition of The Torah (with the 
prophetic haftarahs) has been published by the Union of American 
Hebrew Congregations (1981), and its readings for the festivals follow 
the practice of Reform synagogues. The first volume of Everett Fox’s 
annotated translation of the Torah, entitled In the Beginning (Schocken, 
1983), has appeared and is extraordinary. A new Machzor for Rosh 
Hashanah and Yom Kippur, On Wings of Awe, edited and translated by 
Richard N. Levy (B’nai B'rith Hillel Foundations, 1985), includes 
remarkable poetic English renderings of many prayers and a serious effort 
to use language inclusive of women as well as men in the English (not in 
the Hebrew). Michael Strassfeld’s book The Jewish Holidays (Harper and 
Row, 1985) is a very useful guide with especially creative marginal 
comments by several Jewish teachers. Irving Greenberg’s The Jewish 
Way (Summit, 1988) is especially strong on Yom Hashoah and Yom 
Ha-atzma-ut. 


Tee Peo y ALS 
AN DEW RE 
As we have shown in this book, the Jewish festivals shape time into 
spirals—spirals of months, years, cycles. It is the festivals that give shape 
to these spirals, define the curves that make time into spirals. But the 
process works in the other direction as well—and it is this reverse flow 
that I want to discuss at the “end” of this book. (For this end is also a 
beginning, as in a spiral.) 
What is the reverse flow? It is that the festivals not only define the 
spirals but are defined by them. That is, there are bigger and deeper spirals 
of change—bigger even than the fifty-year Jubilee cycle. These spirals are 
so profound that they may force us to transform our understanding of the 
festivals themselves. 
We ourselves, in this very generation, are in the midst of a great 
curve in this great spiral of profound change—and we are therefore 
present at the moment of deep change in the meaning that some Jews find 
in the festivals and in other elements of Jewish life. | want to share here 
my own sense of those changes. 
In the spirals of time that we have looked at so far, we have seen the 
new moons spiral into years; we have seen the years spiral into seven-year 
sabbatical cycles and twenty-eight-year “Blessing of the Sun” cycles and 
fifty-year Jubilee cycles. Surely this is enough? 
No, for there is still a grander spiral—the procession of the great Eras 
of Jewish History: 
¢ First, the Biblical Era, which was born from a courageous response to 
the breakdown of some dimly seen pre-Israelite society and which was 
followed by doubt and disintegration in the face of Hellenism; 
¢ Second, the Rabbinic Era, which was born from a courageous response 
to the triumph of Hellenism and which was followed by doubt and 
disintegration in the face of Modernism; and 
* The Third Era, as yet unnamed, to which we are now trying to give 
birth—by responding to the triumph of Modernism. 
In this Third Era, what are the great changes? We can point to the 
emergence of the State of Israel and of the free Diasporas of North 
America—that is, to Jewish communities that in different ways have 
created real political power for themselves. We can point to the emer- 
gence of women who are seeking and achieving full equality in all areas of 
Jewish life; who are now carrying their own spiritual experience into 
traditional Judaism; and who are in this way transforming it. We can 
point to the shudder with which Judaism confronts the Nazi Holocaust 
and its efforts to begin confronting the danger of world-wide nuclear 
holocaust and environmental disaster. 
AUDIT 


238 - THE FESTIVALS AND THE FUTURE 
Indeed, all these changes can be seen as aspects of one great change: 
The Jewish people, amid the human race, now have much greater power 
to shape history than we have had before. Once we knew that only God 
had power to destroy all life on earth; now we humans hold that power in 
our hands. Once we knew that only God could restore the Jewish people 
to the Land of Israel; now we have taken that power into our own hands. 
Once we knew that only God could restore women and men to their 
Edenic equality; now we have begun the task. 
Yet, this change has taught us to begin to make another change. For 
this change alone is the lesson of modernity—that we humans have 
enormous power. The new lesson is that there is an enormous danger in 
this knowledge: the danger that if we use our power without self-control, 
we will destroy ourselves and all life on earth. If we act as if we are 
“totally in control” of this planet, we will “total” the planet—proving 
that we are not really totally in control. So we have begun to draw again 
on the pre-modern religious traditions which teach us that there is a 
Mystery within us and beyond us. By spiraling forward, we have also 
spiraled back—to the knowledge of limits, of Mystery, of God. Spiraled 
back to what the festivals themselves have tried to teach us. 
What does all this have to do with the festivals, the seasons of our 
joy? The festivals themselves have been different in these different eras. 
Different and yet the same—as in a spiral we return, yet find ourselves in 
some place different. 
In our Biblical Era, the festivals were a way of asserting with great 
political power that the Jewish people were a band of runaway slaves— 
just liberated from Pharaoh. For when hundreds of thousands of Israelites 
gathered at the Temple in Jerusalem to celebrate Pesach, or Sukkot, their 
presence in such numbers was itself a challenge to Pharaoh—not only 
literally to the Pharaoh of Egypt but also to imperial monarchs of Assyria 
and Babylon and to miniature pharaohs in Canaan itself. 
By the “late Second Temple” period, there had evolved a version of 
the festival cycle that said with special power that the people of Israel 
continued to be a band of runaway slaves, ever celebrating its freedom 
anew. For the cycle had become understood as a reliving of the libera- 
tion—of the exodus from Egypt. Not only was Pesach a moment to relive 
in the present the delivery from Pharaoh, but Shavuot was the moment 
when the headlong rush of slaves away from their slavery was checked; 
when they came face to face at Sinai with a Presence that mirrored their 
own, that forced them to reflect upon themselves, to become a commu- 
nity with a center rather than just a line of march. And Sukkot, it was 
said,. represented the extraordinary time of traveling in the wilderness 
with God’s Presence in the people’s very midst. 
So whenever the people gathered, it recalled itself to the covenant 
of slaves determined to be free. It gathered in huge numbers to exemplify 


THE FESTIVALS AND THE FUTURE - 239 
its own freedom, to defend it, and to accord freedom to others—for “you 
were slaves and strangers in the Land of Mitz-ra-yim.” 
In the Rabbinic Era of our history, this lesson was preserved—and 
transformed. For now, scattered in Diaspora, the Jewish people could not 
show its political power by gathering in one place. Only in the nooks and 
crannies of the Roman Empire, Babylonia, and then of Christendom and 
Islam could the Jews relive what it meant to be liberated. So the Pesach 
Seder became an event in myriad homes—and the Sukkah a hut that was 
built outside myriad homes and congregations. Indeed, the rabbis en- 
coded this very fact of “nook and cranny” into the heart of the Seder; for 
they took the form of a Hellenistic symposium dinner, a philosophic 
discussion intertwined with two cups of wine before dinner and two cups 
afterward, as the form of the Seder. They turned its symbolism upside- 
down in the direction of freedom by having the least learned person 
present ask the questions—not the most learned, as in the symposium. 
And in the very crannies of the conqueror’s culture, they asked the 
celebrants to say both that in every generation a destroyer rises up, and 
that in every generation we, today, are liberated. 
Thus the Seder itself, in its sardonic subversion of the conquering 
power, became a moment of freedom in dispersion. The new form of 
freedom was not found in the ability of the Jewish people to transform the 
world by publicly showing its collective freedom, but in its ability to 
preserve its own identity and values under pressure and conquest. 
This is the model of the festivals that we have inherited: the model 
from Rabbinic times that accepts the limits on Jewish power. We have 
power to make ourselves just, peaceful, holy; we do not have power to 
transform the world. 
But it is precisely this model that no longer defines the Jewish 
people. Traumatized by a modernized super-pogrom that destroyed one- 
third of us, we decided that we must have enough political power to 
protect ourselves. In one generation, we have built that power—and a 
surplus that is enough to have an impact on the rest of the world besides. 
Not only in Israel but in America the Jewish people have such power. We 
do not rule the country but we can make a difference. 
We are free to be both as fully Jewish and as fully citizens as we 
choose to be—and that is, like Israel, a new event. Even in the Soviet 
Union, where we are not free to be both fully Jewish and fully citizens, the 
Jewish community has, against all odds, become the arena of the feistiest 
questioning of governmental power. 
So now we are able to ask ourselves again: can the Jewish traditions, 
experiences, values that are embodied in the festivals be brought into the 
public world? Can a new form of power—not military but militant, not 
violent but vigorous—be expressed through public observance of the 
festivals? 


240 - THE FESTIVALS AND THE FUTURE 
Is this what—all unconsciously—Soviet Jews in the late sixties were 
doing when they carried their Torah-dancing for Simchat Torah into the 
public streets? Is this what American Jews were doing in the late sixties 
when they invented “Freedom Seders”? For these new versions of the 
Haggadah intertwined the ancient Exodus with such modern struggles as 
the Warsaw Ghetto uprising and the work of Nat Turner, Martin Luther 
King, Henry David Thoreau—and thus made it possible for Jews to join 
with black civil rights workers and anti-war activists to do Pesach Seders 
in the public sphere. 
Such responses of Soviet Jews and American Jews to crises in their 
lives came “from the gut”—unplanned, untheorized. But as the move- 
ment for Jewish renewal gathered more strength and self-awareness, by 
the early 1980s networks of Jews all across North America were con- 
sciously drawing on Jewish tradition to carry the meaning of the festivals 
into public awareness. 
The first of these efforts drew on a “festival” that was totally new to 
Jewish life—though the basis for it was extremely old. As Jews began to 
wrestle with the danger of a world-wide nuclear holocaust that might 
destroy all life, one element of Torah that rose up for them was the story 
of the Flood, when almost all life on earth was destroyed. 
This tale is unique in all the tales of Genesis in that there are specific 
dates given for the events. “On the seventeenth day of the second 
month,” says the story, the rains began to pour; the Flood began. One 
lunar year and eleven days later “. . . on the twenty-seventh day of the 
second month . . . ,” after exactly one solar year, the earth is dry again. 
Noah and his family leave the Ark, and God sends the Rainbow to be a 
sign of the convenant that all life will continue: “Seed time and harvest, 
cold and heat, summer and winter, day and night, shall not cease.” 
From the Creation to the Exodus from Egypt, the Torah gives no 
dates—except for the Flood. Why did Torah preserve the tradition of 
these dates when it did not provide any dates for such important events as 
the departure of Abraham and Sarah from Ur at God’s command, or 
Jacob’s wrestle with God in which he took on the name Israel— 
“Godwrestler”? What are we to make of these dates? 
For many other dates—the date of the Exodus itself, for instance; 
the date of the destruction of the Temple; the date of Esther’s triumph 
over Haman—we know what to do. We turn these dates into Pesach, 
Tisha B’Av, Purim—moments to re-experience liberation, disaster, turn- 
ing the tables. We relive the moment from our history, in order to draw 
on the ancient experience for the sake of our own lives. 
But we have never done this with the dates of the Flood and the 
Rainbow. Why not? Suddenly, to many Jews who were involved in efforts 
to “renew” Jewish life, it seemed clear that these dates had never become 
times of observance because no generation had ever faced the danger that 


THE FESTIVALS AND THE FUTURE + 24] 
all life might be destroyed, or the necessity of consciously joining in a 
covenant to act to preserve all life. 
No generation—until our own. So now these dates leaped off the 
scroll of Torah, to come alive for the first time in Jewish practice. 
What to do? First of all, a curious debate that began long ago among 
the rabbis of the Talmud had to be resolved. When was “the second 
month”? Most of the rabbis said, in the fall—the month of bitter 
Heshvan—counting from Tishri, the month of Rosh Hashanah, as the 
first. But Rabbi Yehoshua said—and “the sages of all the other nations” 
agreed with him—that the Flood began and ended in the spring, 
counting from Nisan, the month of Pesach. By this count, the Flood 
began on 17 lyyar and ended one year later on 27 lyyar. 
Which month to choose for an observance? The community decided 
to honor the unusual fact that for this debate, the Talmud cited the 
opinions of the sages of all nations. Usually their views could have no 
weight in the interpretation of Israel’s Torah. But for this text, their 
understanding mattered. For the Flood affected every nation; it and the 
three-sided covenant between God, all living breathing beings, and 
Noah's family, was the archetype in Jewish thought of what was universal 
danger and deliverance. 
Thus, facing the universal danger of nuclear holocaust, it seemed 
appropriate to side with Rabbi Yehcshua and the sages of all nations. And 
so, beginning in 1982, first dozens and then hundreds of Jewish com- 
munities began to observe the time of Rainbow Sign. They drew on the 
full eleven-day period from 17 Iyyar to 27 Iyyar as the holy time, so that 
any Shabbos or any Sunday in the period could be used to celebrate. 
They developed new ceremonial forms to recognize the season. 
These included reading the Torah passages about the Flood and the 
Rainbow (especially Genesis 8:14-22 and 9:8-17) and as Prophetic 
haftarah, the passage from Hosea about renewing the covenant with all of 
life and breaking “bow, sword, and battle from the earth” (Hosea 2:20- 
25). 
The ceremonies often included the lifting of a human “rainbow” to 
the sky by releasing multicolored balloons. Some communities sang the 
traditional song about the Flood: “Rise and Shine and Give God the 
Glory, Glory,” with two new verses at the end: “So Noah he sent out/ 
Sent out a dovey, dovey./ She stayed out/But sent back her lovey lovey/ 
Children of the Lord”; and “God gave to Noah a Bow/With colors seven;/ 
Peace on earth/as in the highest Heaven!/Children of the Lord.”: 
Other groups have chanted specific psalms, especially Psalm 69: 
“Save me, O God! For the waters have risen up to my neck. . .” and the 
end of Psalm 29: “Yah will sit above the Flood—God’s reign will never 
cease. For God will give the people strength and bless the world with 
peace.” Some have invited those present to name aloud a place on Planet 


242 - THE FESTIVALS AND THE FUTURE 
Earth that needs special healing from impending destruction, and then 
chanted “Eyl na r’fa na lah!” —“Please God, heal her!” 
Most of the celebrating communities have invited a speaker to 
address the connection between the Flood story and the danger of nuclear 
holocaust—a “Flood of Fire,” as the rabbis warned might still be possible. 
Some have asked for two speakers or a double focus: one on the danger 
(the Flood), the other on new possibilities and hope (the Rainbow). One 
more element of the observance of Rainbow Sign that might be noted: 
many Jewish communities and congregations have invited other religious 
and ethnic groups to share in this particular observance, simply because 
the ancient story is a universal one and the present danger is a universal 
one. 
Another festival that has become a focus of concern about the 
danger of nuclear holocaust is Sukkot. Drawing on the prayer “Ufros 
alenu sukkat sh’lomecha”—“Spread over us the sukkah of Your peace” — 
The Shalom Center in Philadelphia and hundreds of congregations and 
other Jewish groups have created Sukkat Shalom. The sukkah-booth 
itself is so open, so vulnerable that it is precisely the opposite of a fallout 
shelter; it proclaims that the only security in the world today comes from 
all peoples’ sharing with each other the knowledge that everyone is 
vulnerable. Just as the sukkah is open to every wind and rainstorm, so 
under the rain of nuclear weapons, no roof, no “shield,” can make any 
nation safe. 
In 1980, sukkot bearing this message were built in Lafayette Park, 
between the White House and the Soviet Embassy in Washington; and 
also in Independence Park in Philadelphia, Boston Common, Daley Plaza 
in Chicago, and in many other cities. These Sukkot Shalom acted as 
gathering points for public discussion and rallies; in some, the homeless 
and the poor came as guests (ushpizin) to eat; in some, the “70 Nations” 
were invited to embody the ancient tradition that 70 sacrifices were 
offered at the temple during Sukkot, on behalf of peace and plenty for all 
the 70 nations of the world. 
Many families and congregations dedicated their own sukkot to 
shalom; and in many religious schools, children helped decorate the 
sukkah with symbols of peace. Even non-synagogue groups joined in 
Sukkot Shalom celebrations. 
Then the Sukkot Shalom committees began to realize that in every 
even-numbered year, Sukkot will come a few weeks before an American 
national election. Most participants felt that it would be Jewishly 
inauthentic to turn Sukkot into an electioneering time for this candidate 
or that party. But most of them also felt it was perfectly authentic to make 
Sukkot a moment in which the Jewish community could remind itself 
that no Jew should enter an election booth without the issue of shalom 
foremost in their minds. ‘‘From harvest booth to voting booth,” one activist 


THE FESTIVALS AND THE FUTURE - 243 
said, “there is a difference, but the path from one to the other should be 
clear and well walked. It would be a profanation to fit Sukkot into the 
thythm of American elections, but it would be an affirmation to fit 
American elections into the rhythm of Sukkot.” 
The development of Sukkot Shalom raised questions that its origina- 
tors had not expected about the relationships of religious communities to 
the state. When sukkot were built on public space, some Jewish organiza- 
tions committed to the separation of religion and the state raised a flag of 
Opposition: was not this state entanglement in, and support of, religion? 
Some participants replied that confronting the state was utterly different 
from depending on it, and that neither the First Amendment to the U.S. 
Constitution nor Jewish values would forbid religious communities to use 
their own deepest symbols to challenge government policy. Some sukkot 
were built in this spirit. On the other hand, in response to this dialogue 
some Sukkot Shalom were erected in private space, were moved for the 
space of a single day to public space in order to serve as the focus for a 
rally, and were then dismantled or moved again at the end of the day. 
This approach underlined the sense that the sukkah was not a creature of 
the state, but of the people who dwelt in and around it. 
These new issues stemmed from the new outlook on what the 
festivals might mean in the “Third Era” of Jewish life. Increasingly, as 
new aspects of Jewish renewal unfolded into experiment and experience, 
excitement grew about what it meant to carry profound meanings of the 
festivals into the world. 
Perhaps the most basic of these—and perhaps the most crucial 
corrective of the “modern” perspective—is simply the teaching that some 
time is holy; some days are sacred; some rhythms are central to the 
meaning of life. 
In a world in which any moments of rest, celebration, meditation— 
the festivals of any religious tradition or spiritual orientation—are often 
seen as “a waste of time” because they detract from productive work, it is 
crucial to remind ourselves that work is not the only valuable behavior. 
Doing, making, producing, must be part of a rhythm in which being also 
has its place. 
This is the ultimate message of the seasons of our joy: that there is 
joy in the seasons themselves, in our very decision to join in noting 
them, in celebrating them, in walking the spiritual path—the spiral— 
that they make. 
—RABBI ARTHUR O. WASKOW 
Wyncote, Pennsylvania 
November 21, 1985 
8 Kislev 5746 


AFTERWORD AGAIN 
I finished writing the first edition of Seasons of Our Joy in 1981 on the most 
un-ordinary festive season of them all—Birkat HaChamah, the Blessing of the 
Sun, which comes only every twenty-eight years. I wrote that by the next Birkat 
HaChamah, in 2009, we would need another edition—because Judaism would 
probably have changed and grown so much in the meantime. 
Here we are, only three years “late.” There have indeed been many changes, 
as feminist Judaism, neo-Chassidic mysticism, eco-Judaism, and Jewish medita- 
tion have all emerged or become much stronger and have newly colored our 
understanding of the festivals. Time, indeed, for another afterword. 
When Seasons was first published, one of its newest insights was in fact a 
very old one: that the festivals are all rooted in the dance of Earth, Sun, and 
Moon. This was deeply understood by the biblical Israelites, who were an indig- 
enous people celebrating their cycles of rainy and dry, hot and cold, fruitful and 
barren. But this understanding had become so alien to many “modern” Jews 
that the first review of Seasons condemned the book as pagan because it was so 
Earth-oriented—even though it fully affirmed the historical and psychological 
and spiritual meanings of the festivals. 
One important measure of change in the generation since is that today it 
would be very unlikely for any Jewish commentator to condemn the book that 
way. All or almost all of the Jewish community has come to celebrate, not fear or 
deny, the earthy aspect of Judaism and the festivals. 
THE CHANGING NAMES OF GOD 
This profound shift has even affected one of the bedrock metaphors of 
Judaism—the Names of God. Throughout the original edition of Seasons, the 
“YHWH)” Name is transmitted as “Adonai, Lord,” along with the metaphor of 
God as “Melekh, King”—as has been conventional for thousands of years. But 
since the book’s first publication, a combination of feminist, communitarian, 
and ecological sensibilities have brought into question the hierarchical intention 
and impact of these metaphors. 
As Jews have searched for alternative metaphors, two have attracted wide in- 
terest. One, set forth by Marcia Falk in The Book of Blessings, is “Eyn HaChayyim, 
Wellspring of Life.” The other, which I have set forth in Godwrestling—Round 2 
and in two books with Phyllis Berman—A Time for Every Purpose Under Heaven: 
The Jewish LifeSpiral as a Spiritual Path and Freedom Journeys: The Tale of Exodus and 
Wilderness across Millennia—is rooted in actually trying to pronounce the tradi- 
tionally “unpronounceable” Name. 


AFTERWORD AGAIN + 245 
For most people, trying to say “YHWH” with no vowels produces a breath 
or the sound of the wind. So this alternative metaphor is experiencing God as 
the Breath or Interbreathing of all life—“Ruach ha’olam, Breathing Spirit” of 
the world, rather than king of the world. This Breath metaphor for God points 
beyond Hebrew to all languages, as a universal God might be expressed; it also 
bespeaks the ecological truth that human beings and other animals breathe in 
what the trees and grasses breathe out, and in turn the trees and grasses breathe 
in what we breathe out. Even more poignantly, a growing imbalance in these 
two gases—oxygen and carbon dioxide—is the cause of the climate crisis that is 
endangering the web of life on Earth. That crisis is a crisis in this understanding 
of the very Name of God. 
How then to pronounce “YHWH)” in prayer? The ancient “Yod-Hei” Name 
of God, “Yahh,” as it appears in many psalms (“Hallelu-Yahh, let us praise God”), 
offers an authentic possibility. 
So if I were writing Seasons from scratch, I would provide alongside every 
blessing that begins “Baruch atah Adonai, elohenu melekh ha’olam” an alterna- 
tive: “Baruch atah Yahh, elohenu ruach ha’olam . . .” (Blessed are You, Inter- 
breathing Spirit of the world . . .) 
Note that both these newer metaphors—“Wellspring of Life” and “Breath- 
ing Spirit”—are rooted in the earth. That itself, like the very existence of this 
book, may be an index to the deepest concerns of the newer generations of the 
Jewish people. 
CELEBRATION AS SOCIAL ACTIVISM 
When I wrote the first edition of Seasons, I could already point to a few 
cases in which the festivals had been celebrated as direct actions for social change 
(especially uses of the Freedom Seder for Passover and its offshoots). In the gen- 
eration since, there have been many more such occasions. 
HIGH HOLY DAYS 
In the three-year stretch of 2005-7 ce, the Jewish sacred month of Tishrei 
coincided with the Muslim sacred month of Ramadan. Tishrei is the seventh 
“moonth,” with festivals at every phase of the moon: Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kip- 
pur, Sukkot, Sh’mini Atzeret. Jews focus on repentance, forgiveness, changing 
their lives, and sharing abundance. For Muslims, Ramadan is a time of turning 
toward God, a focus facilitated by fasting from food and water from sunrise to 
sunset for an entire month. This confluence had last previously occurred in 
1973-75 ce, and it will not occur again until 2038-40 ce. In the most recent 
confluence, the doubly sacred month also encompassed the Saint’s Day of St. 


246 + AFTERWORD AGAIN 
Francis of Assisi, who studied with Muslims and learned from them new ways to 
shape his Christian prayer, and the World Communion Day of Protestantism. 
Led by a group of Jews, Christians, and Muslims called “The Tent of Abra- 
ham, Hagar, and Sarah,” members of the three Abrahamic faiths in many Ameri- 
can communities celebrated the confluence by meeting, praying, and breaking 
fasts together, honoring the uniqueness and the underlying spiritual similarities 
of their varied festivals. In 2007 some Jews and Christians joined in one day’s 
practice of Ramadan, sharing a fast from sunrise to sunset while calling for an 
end to the Iraq War. Although this particular confluence will next require a 
three-decade wait, the three years of sharing encouraged some adherents of all 
three faiths to explore sharing their festivals even when they do not coincide. 
In September 2011 thousands of Americans took to the streets in hundreds 
of cities to “Occupy Wall Street” (and other public spaces) to protest the cen- 
tralization of top-down power in giant corporations and the “1 percent” of great 
wealth. Many Jews faced a dilemma: The High Holy Days were about to arrive. If 
they shared the values of “Occupy Wall Street,” should they betray those values 
or betray their Jewish tradition? 
By Yom Kippur, thousands had resolved the dilemma in an unprecedented 
and creative way: they brought Kol Nidrei into the streets. It was the one event 
of the Jewish year that had been most cloistered, most closeted. Thousands of 
Jews who had not entered a synagogue all year would gather in synagogues on 
that one night. In 2011 Jews carried it into public space to affirm a public value. 
Kol Nidrei in the streets bore an uncanny resemblance to the way in which 
the Freedom Seder of 1969 drew thousands of (mostly young) Jews to take Pass- 
over out of its ancient musty closet of focus—on the experience of ancient Israel 
under ancient pharaohs. With the Freedom Seder, they addressed in a power- 
fully Jewish way the contemporary public issues of racism, war, and nonviolence. 
Out of that energy, interwoven with feminism and neo-Chassidic mysticism, be- 
gan the wave that renewed and revitalized much of Jewish life for a generation. 
We do not yet know whether the Kol Nidrei wave of explicitly Jewish energy 
for a critical social issue presages a generational wave of intensified Jewish com- 
mitment to deep social change—a “Transformative Judaism” committed not only 
to the renewal of Judaism but to the healing and transformation of the world in 
the midst of planetary crisis. 
One ritual affirmation of this attitude has been a new approach to the 
Avodah service during Yom Kippur. Anciently, at noon the High Priest came out 
from the Holy of Holies and stood before the people to pronounce aloud God’s 
Name. The people—more than a million—prostrated themselves. If the Name 
the High Priest pronounced was “YHWH” as a breath, and the people lay flat 
on their faces on the earth, breathing with him, that time would have recapitu- 
lated the birth of Adam/Earthling from Adamah/Earth. The newborn human 
species, like a newborn child, must learn to breathe independently, having left 
behind the placental “-ah” Breath from Mother. 


AFTERWORD AGAIN + 247 
But today it is crucial for many of us to remember whose child we are. So 
today, in some communities, the congregants go into the open at the Avodah 
service and lie on their faces, breathing, smelling the grass, remembering how 
close our relationship is with Mother Earth. 
SUKKOT 
In 2011, immediately after celebrating Kol Nidrei in the streets, these Jews 
built sukkot as part of the “Occupy” encampments. These sukkot became not 
just symbols of a Jewish presence but—drawing on the harvest aspect of the Suk 
kot festival—venues for discussion of how to deal with corporate control of ag- 
riculture and the food industry and similar issues befitting the “Occupy Wall 
Street” ethos. 
In 1988 the Elat Chayyim retreat center and the Shalom Center cooperated 
in making Hoshanah Rabbah, the seventh day of Sukkot, into a direct action 
about pcs pollution of the Hudson River by General Electric. Hoshanah Rabbah 
(literally, “the Great please save us”) is characterized by beating willow branches 
on the earth, anciently near rivers because willows, needing lots of water, grow 
there. The ceremony points toward the need for rain. 
It also includes chanting seven prayers for salvation of the earth from 
drought, locusts, and other disasters. One of these traditional prayers ends, 
“Please save our planet, suspended in space”—written long before anyone could 
even imagine our generation’s iconic photograph of our planet, indeed suspend- 
ed in space. To the dangers we seek to prevent, the activists added, “Please save 
us from poisons cast into the river.” 
For the occasion, Rabbi Zalman Schachter-Shalomi wrote a new Hoshana 
prayer in English, preserving the alphabetic pattern in the Hebrew hoshanot, fo- 
cusing on the seven days of Creation: 
For the first day— 
Hosha’na for the sake of 
the Aura of life 
the Beams of light 
the Clearness of light 
the Dynamics of light 
the Effulgence of light 
the diFfraction of light 
the Glory of light 
the Haloes of light 
the Illumination of light 
the Joys of sight 


248 » AFTERWORD AGAIN 
For the third day— 
Hosha’na for the sake of 
the Ubiquity of the plants 
the Variety of the plants 
the Wellness of the plants 
the Xanthia gum trees 
the Yucca plants 
the Zucchinis and Zinnias 
the Aspen trees 
the Berry bushes 
the Chlorophyll made by the leaves 
the Date palms 
For the fifth day— 
Hosha’na for the sake of 
Owls and Other Oviparous life 
Perches and Plovers 
Quail and Quahaugs 
Robins and Red Snappers 
Seagulls and Swordfish 
Turtles and Turtledoves 
Univalves 
Varieties of plankton 
Waterfowl and Whales 
Yellowtails and other tunas' 
The ceremony/action included the seven hakkafot—dances with the Torah 
Scroll—that traditionally accompany the seven hoshanot. Each was led by a col- 
ored banner, symbolizing the seven days of Creation: for example, yellow for the 
day of sun, moon, and stars; green for vegetation; red for mammals; white for 
Shabbos. 
The event gathered not only hundreds of Jews who lived along the Hudson 
from Kingston to Manhattan but also Catholic nuns from convents along the 
river, an Iroquois elder, and the folk singer Pete Seeger. All joined in signing peti- 
tions to require General Electric to clean up the poisonous pcBs it had poured 
into the Hudson. 
HANUKKAH 
Moving further into the festival cycle, we discover new meanings given to 
Hanukkah. This began with the realization that the story of rededicating the 
Temple menorah, with its teaching that “one day’s oil could meet eight days’ 
needs,” could be applied to the crisis of industrial society’s addiction to oil, and 


AFTERWORD AGAIN - 249 
that the victory over ancient Imperial Antiochus could be analogized to seeking 
victory over Big Oil corporations today. 
As some Jews probed the meaning of Hanukkah more deeply, they drew 
on the Torah’s description of the Temple menorah—modeled on a tree with 
branches, calyxes, and blossoms (Ex. 25:31-40). In Zechariah’s prophetic Haf- 
tarah, read on Shabbat Hanukkah, and in his ecstatic vision a few verses later 
(Zech. 4:11-13), they found the assertion that the menorah was indeed in some 
sense a tree, fed with olive oil directly from a living olive tree on either side. 
From this grew the symbol of the Green Menorah and its use in Hanukkah activ- 
ism for moving beyond oil. 
TB SHVAT 
The original edition of Seasons was the first English-language book on the 
festivals to treat Tu B’Shvat as a major free-standing station on the festival cycle. 
In the years since, observance of Tu B’Shvat has greatly spread and deepened, 
usually as a festival concerned with dangers facing the web of life on Earth and 
ways to protect it. Many who observe it often integrate this approach with the 
Kabbalistic tradition (stemming from the Lurianic School in Safed in the six- 
teenth century) that created the Tu B’Shvat Seder. 
Two important intellectual events marked this growth. In 1989 Ellen Bern- 
stein wrote and published The Trees’ Birthday, a text for an ecologically oriented 
Tu B’Shvat Seder. Though publicized only through “unofficial” channels, the 
booklet sold very well and made possible hundreds of eco-Seders. In 2000 the 
Jewish Publication Society published Trees, Earth, and Torah, a major anthology 
of texts, poetry, songs, prayers, and other materials on trees and the development 
of the festival from biblical times to the present, edited by Ari Elon, Naomi Mara 
Hyman, and Arthur Waskow. 
This wave of Tu B’Shvat celebration led to a remarkable gathering initiated 
by a small group of rabbis in northern California—the “Redwood Rabbis.” In 
1997 they decided to draw on Jewish teaching to help challenge the logging of 
ancient redwood trees by a corporation owned by a Jewish family. With the help 
of the Shalom Center, they brought together about three hundred people to 
hold a Tu B’Shvat Seder in a publicly owned and protected redwood grove. Then 
the celebrants, carrying redwood seedlings, illegally walked onto corporate ter- 
ritory to plant the seedlings where two-thousand-year-old trees had been logged. 
They expected to be arrested for trespassing, and indeed police officers were on 
the scene, but the corporate executives stepped back from confrontation.” 
PURIM 
In 1981] 1 pointed out that Ahasuerus’s willingness to annihilate Jews and 
his willingness to demean and oppress women had much in common. “Vashti’s 


250 - AFTERWORD AGAIN 
Song” in this book was one of the earliest efforts to bring a feminist sensibility 
into the celebration itself. The song “She Said No to the King” by Margot Stein, 
Rayzel Raphael, and Juliet Spitzer extended the metaphor. Here is an excerpt: 
Without her gown, he summoned her down 
Said it was his right, as a man with a crown 
He was obsessed; she should be undressed. 
Vashti refused to be, a woman oppressed. 
(Chorus) 
She said “no” to the king, 
She said “no” to the king, 
She said “no-no-no-no-no-no-no” 
She said “no” to the king! 
Esther took heart, that girl was so smart, 
Thinking of others and doing her part 
She was to find to get out of the bind 
She needed her body and also her mind. 
(Chorus)? 
More and more broadly, Purim and its story have become a time and a 
metaphor for Jewish women’s social activism. The National Council of Jewish 
Women has held “Vashti’s banquets” to celebrate and fundraise for its work. Ko- 
lot: Center for Jewish Women’s and Gender Studies, housed at the Reconstruc- 
tionist Rabbinical College, has made a feminist take on Purim an important part 
of its work. “Jewish Women Watching,” an underground group of anonymous 
women, has often used Purim themes when sending Jewish women and men 
materials subversive of top-down, male-chauvinist power. 
In a radically different way of taking Purim into social action, on Purim 
morning in 1994, Baruch Goldstein, an American Israeli Jewish member of an 
Israeli settlement outside the Palestinian city of Hebron, walked into the mosque 
built over the Tomb of Abraham and shot to death twenty-nine Muslims who 
were prostrate in prayer. He seems to have chosen the time in honor of the later 
parts of the Scroll of Esther, in which the Jews are said to have killed seventy-five 
thousand Persians in what may or may not have been self-defense. 
One response to this event in some parts of the American Jewish commu- 
nity has been a new way of understanding and observing the Fast of Esther, the 
day before Purim. That has been a bringing together of Jews, Christians, and 
Muslims to acknowledge and repent of the bloody streaks in the traditions of 
each faith-community. 


AFTERWORD AGAIN + 25] 
Doing this has called attention to an interesting aspect of the Fast of Esther. 
When early Jewish religious leaders chose the 13th of Adar as the date for that 
fast, the 13th of Adar was already the time for a Jewish festival. (It is not a date 
the Scroll gives for Esther’s fast before her risky act of nonviolent civil disobedi- 
ence—appealing directly to the king, at the risk of her life.) Adar 13 was called 
Yom Nicanor, Nicanor Day, celebrating a Maccabeean victory over a general of 
Antiochus’s imperial Syrian-Hellenistic army. By making it a fast day, the rabbis 
effectively destroyed Yom Nicanor. 
Taking into account the rabbis’ critical view of the Maccabees, it is possible 
they consciously wanted to abolish the celebration of a military victory. From 
that perspective, observing the Fast of Esther by Abrahamic traditions taking 
responsibility for their own bloodshed may echo the rabbis’ intention. 
Finally, there has emerged a semi-activist reinterpretation of the passage 
on Amalek that is read on the Shabbos just before Purim. The passage teaches: 
Remember what Amalek did to you; when you reach a place of safety blot out (or 
“blur”?) the memory of Amalek; don’t forget. Barbara Breitman, a psychothera- 
pist and spiritual director, has seen this as analogous to the treatment of some- 
one who has been abused as a child: Recover your memories of the abuse; when 
you are safe, let them recede so that the abuse does not control your life; but 
don’t forget, lest you remain forever a victim or become yourself a perpetrator. 
Others have read the teaching as applying to our own selves. There is always 
the danger that we can become Amalek. If we can become drunk enough on 
Purim that “Baruch Mordechai; aror Haman” (Blessed is Mordechai; accursed 
is Haman) become identical (as indeed they are in gematria, Jewish numerology), 
then we need to caution ourselves ahead of time against letting the Haman/ 
Amalek within run away with us in the triumphant spirit of Purim. 
PESACH 
Of all the festivals, Pesach, with its tale of overthrowing an oppressive ruler, 
is the most inviting for social action. Although in 1981 I was already reporting 
an explosion of Haggadahs devoted to racial justice, women’s liberation, and 
opposition to modern empires and foreign wars, the pattern has grown in the 
generation since. Seders for labor rights and immigrants’ rights have flowered. 
Sometimes these Seders have been carried out in public, directly challenging 
some modern “pharaoh.” 
A women’s group in New York, Ma’yan, held a women’s Seder each year 
shortly before Pesach for hundreds of women. It became a major spiritual and 
political event. Another feminist Seder was celebrated in homes for decades by 
the same group of activist and influential women so that it became itself a form 
of social action.’ 
Perhaps the most experimental or exploratory of the new Haggadahs were 
the Seder for the Children of Abraham (published in 1984) and a successor in the 


252 + AFTERWORD AGAIN 
same mode, the Seder for the Children of Abraham, Hagar, and Sarah (published in 
1999).5 They used the Pesach symbols—matzah, bitter herb, four cups of wine— 
but built the Seder not around the story of liberation from Pharaoh but around 
the story of conflict and ultimate reconciliation between Isaac and Ishmael, in- 
tertwined with the story of enmity and the hope of reconciliation between the 
Israeli and Palestinian peoples. 
In 2009, in honor of the fortieth anniversary of the original Freedom Sed- 
er, the Shalom Center created an Interfaith Seder for the Earth, and organized it to 
be celebrated, like the original Freedom Seder, in an African American church 
in Washington bc. This Seder used the Exodus story of the Ten Plagues as a key 
to the current disasters affecting the earth and human societies. It treated the an- 
cient Plagues not as magical interventions from an outsider God but as intrinsic 
consequences of the pharaoh’s oppressive actions, mediated by the immanent 
God Who is the Interbreathing of all life.® 
For a widely praised and utilized new Haggadah, see A Different Night: The 
Family Participation Haggadah, edited by David Dishon and Noam Zion (Shalom 
Hartman Institute, 1997). For a whole new approach to weaving your own Hag- 
gadah, see www. haggadot.com, a website where you can draw on dozens of dif 
ferent sources. 
TISHA B’AV 
During the past generation, contemplating the ancient destructions of the 
Holy Temple in Jerusalem, some in the Jewish community began to view the 
earth itself as a universal Holy Temple of all humanity—all life. A Holy Temple 
that in our own day is facing the danger of destruction. What should Tisha B’Av 
mean at such a moment? Where is a modern Jeremiah to prophesy what actions 
we must take? 
Responding to this insight, many were struck to discover an ancient Rab- 
binic midrash: Question: “When was the first Eicha [the first word and the tradi- 
tional name of the Book of Lamentations]?” Answer: “When God said ‘Ayekka’ 
{which uses the same consonants as ‘Eicha’] in the Garden of Eden, asking Eve 
and Adam, ‘Where are you?” (Gen. 3:9). 
What this teaches is that some of the ancient rabbis were already thinking 
of the Jewish Exile as a special case of the universal danger of personal, spiri- 
tual, and social exile. Moreover, the exile from Eden was the result of human 
greed toward the earth. In Eden, God—“Reality”—says that there is extraordinary 
abundance available for human enjoyment. But there must be a measure of self. 
restraint: “Of one tree you must not eat.” Yet the human race can not restrain 
itself, and as a result the abundance vanishes: “Thorns and thistles shall the 
earth give forth” (Gen. 2:16; 3:17-19). 
In the summer of 2009, in the midst of the BP oil-well disaster in the Gulf 
of Mexico, eco-Jewish activists who took this view of Tisha B’Av worked with 


AFTERWORD AGAIN + 253 
secular environmentalists to create an observance of Tisha B’Av by demonstra- 
tors on Capitol Hill, aimed at urging Congress to act in defense of the earth. The 
action included chanting of a universal version of Eicha and prayers, poems, and 
statements from many ethical and spiritual traditions. 
THE MOON 
In Kiddush Levana, the celebration of the early phases of the recently re- 
appeared moon, the traditional prayers include the line, “Just as one cannot 
touch the moon, so may our enemies not touch us.” It would be said while the 
celebrants leaped toward the moon as if trying and failing to touch it. But since 
1981, as the realization has sunk in that indeed now we can touch the moon, and 
that this ability arises from the same technology that makes it possible to fling a 
missile from anywhere on Earth to anywhere else, some communities have sub- 
stituted this line: “Just as the children of Adam and Chava now can touch the 
moon, so enemies can now touch each other. May we all now learn to touch each 
other’s hearts so that we cease to be enemies.” This carries forward the Messianic 
yearning of Kiddush Levana. 
OTHER REINTERPRETATIONS 
OF THEFESTIVALS 
HIGH HOLY DAYS. OF TISHRET 
In the past generation, Kabbalah, in its attempt to understand the inward- 
ness of God, changes within God, and their effects on us, has been much more 
widely explored in many parts of the Jewish community. This has had an effect 
on understanding of the holy days—especially those in Tishrei. 
In some Chassidic teachings that have now entered broader streams of 
Jewish life (often brought and broadened by Rabbi Zalman SchachterShalomi), 
every Yom Kippur God is understood to have abandoned the previous year’s 
Name, as it needed mending from the damage of human sin since the last Yom 
Kippur. When the High Priest went into the Holy of Holies on Yom Kippur, 
therefore, he was discerning a new Name in order to bring it to the people. 
The length of a traditional Yorn Kippur is not the 25 hours of an ordi- 
nary Shabbos but 26 for this “Shabbat Shabbaton.” In the tradition of gematria, 
in which Hebrew letters are also numbers and can express words, the name 
“YHWH”—Yud (10) Hey (5) Vav (6) Hey (5)—counts out to 26. So God becomes 
incarnate in time on that day. 
Rabbi Schachter-Shalomi adds: 


254 ~ AFTERWORD AGAIN 
And then there are four days that take us to Sukkot. The Hassidim call 
them “the four days of God’s Name.” In other words, the first day is when 
the letter Yud comes down, the second day the letter Hey, then the Vay, 
and then the other Hey. It’s like the letting down of the Divine Name, 
bringing down the Name one day at a time. Finally, Sukkot arrives and we 
can start to dance. Now that the Name is back down on earth again we can 
celebrate and so we do Simchat Torah. 
By dancing the seven dances of that night, we affirm as well that the 
seven S’phirot (emanations/aspects of God: Loving-kindness, Rigor, and 
so forth) have also come to earth and entered us.’ 
PESACH 
There have emerged many new approaches to making the Seder itself a 
liberating event for its participants. Some are new midrashim like these: 
“Why do we break the matzah in two? Because if we try to hold on to the 
whole matzah, it remains the bread of affliction. Only if we break it and share it 
does it become the bread of freedom.” 
“What is the meaning of charoset? The oral tradition says it recalls the 
mortar that Israelite slaves were forced to use in building Pharaoh’s cities. But 
since charoset is delicious, this makes sense only if we are to learn that slavery 
can come to seem sweet. Perhaps there is an even more hidden meaning: All 
the ingredients of charoset—wine, raisins, nuts, apples, spices—are mentioned in 
the Song of Songs, which we are taught to read on Pesach. Perhaps charoset is 
the Seder’s embodiment of the deeply body-full Song: erotic, earthy, subversive, 
liberating, loving, delicious.” 
More liberating than even these specific new interpretations, however, is 
a practice proposed by Martha Hausman that has spread to many households: 
that a special “Freedom Plate” be set next to the traditional Seder plate. On it 
every participant in the Seder places a physical object, as a symbol of her or his 
own liberation from an individual Narrow Place in the year past. Some house- 
holds have used this practice in a second Seder, having absorbed the traditional 
Exodus story on the first night of Pesach. One custom is that soon after begin- 
ning the Seder, those present begin lifting and explaining their freedom-objects. 
Another is to wait until reciting the passage, “In every generation we ourselves 
must become free, not only recite the liberation of our forebears.” 
Mature learned Jews, children, and people who have never before attended 
a Seder can all relate to this. In one Seder in which I took part, one person’s 
freedom-object was a justcompleted five-hundred-page book manuscript; for an- 
other it was a single gold coin that his father had brought out of Nazi Germany 
as a last-ditch economic prop in case destitution was descending; for another, a 
watch (representing liberation from rigid time rules); for another, nothing—as 


AFTERWORD AGAIN + 255 
an “object” of freedom from the rule that something should be brought. Stories 
about the objects on the Freedom Plate become a very powerful part of the 
Seder. 
In 1981 there was only the vaguest notion among American and Israeli Jews 
of Maimuna, a great celebration by Moroccan Jews on the evening and day after 
Pesach. At that point, some thought that the day had been named for Maimon 
ben Joseph, the father of Rambam (Maimonides), but there is another explana- 
tion of Maimuna and its name that seems much more likely in the light of actual 
relationships between Jews and Muslims in Morocco. 
The custom grew up centuries ago, and still survives, that on the evening 
after Pesach ends, when Jews can again eat leavened bread but have not yet had 
time to bake it in their own homes, the Muslim community brings them loaves 
of bread. And at the end of the month of Ramadan, during which Muslirns fast 
from sunrise to sunset every day, Jews bring the Muslim community some food 
to begin the great Feast of Breaking-the-Fast, Eid-el-Fitr. These gifts between the 
two communities are given with loving joy. 
Maimuna starts with an evening meal of foods symbolic of birth and fertil 
ity—milk, figs, ears of wheat, and pancakes with butter and honey. Often a live 
fish, swimming in a bowl, is on the table, probably reminding the diners that 
fish are considered the most fertile of creatures. Alongside the fish bowl is likely 
to be a bowl of flour in which golden rings are hidden. 
The chacham (sage) of each local Jewish community dips a sprig of mint in 
a bowl of milk and sprinkles the milk on the heads of the community’s mem- 
bers. There is a great bustle of visiting and sharing foods from one household to 
another. On the following day there are large picnics at beaches, fields, and cem- 
eteries. In light of all this, it may well be that “Maimuna” comes from maimon, 
the Hebrew word for “prosperity.” 
In Israel, Jews of Moroccan background carry on the Maimuna tradition 
with each other, including a large gettogether in Jerusalem. In the United States, 
some Jewish and Muslim communities have made Maimuna and the end of 
Ramadan a time for peaceful visiting to redress the fear and anger that have 
sometimes beset the two cultures in recent generations. 
New recipes for Pesach that meet the prohibition on leavening have mul- 
tiplied since 1981. (See, for example, Gail Ashkenazi-Hankin’s Passover Lite for 
low-fat Passover foods.) It should be noted that some leading Ashkenazic rabbis 
in Israel have argued that the prohibition on rice and beans for Ashkenazic Jews 
is rooted in flawed teachings, nowadays leads to friction with Sephardic Jews, 
and should be abandoned. 
One new recipe that stands out is Rabbi Phyllis Berman’s extraordinary 
version (adapted from Maita Heatter’s Book of Great Chocolate Desserts) of an ut- 
terly flourless, utterly delicious chocolate cake. It takes 1% hours plus chilling 
time to prepare: 


256 - AFTERWORD AGAIN 
CHOCOLATE PESACH CAKE 
CAKE 
oil, for pan 4 eggs, separated 
1 pound good-quality semisweet 1 tablespoon matzah cake meal 
chocolate, in pieces pinch of salt 
5 ounces canola or safflower oil 6 tablespoons sugar 
(The amount of sugar depends on the bitterness of the chocolate: with 70 
percent chocolate solids, use 6 tablespoons sugar; with 62-65 percent chocolate, 
use 3 tablespoons; with less that 62 percent or chocolate that doesn’t have a 
percentage on the label, use 1 tablespoon.) 
Preheat oven to 425°. Place the rack in the lower third of the oven. Oil an 
8-inch springform pan. Fit the bottom with a round of parchment paper, and 
grease the paper. 
Place the chocolate in the top of a double boiler, and place over simmering 
water until nearly melted. Remove from heat, stir to melt completely, then beat 
in the oil a little at a time. Transfer the mixture to a big bowl. 
Beat the egg yolks for about 5 minutes, until thick. Whisk in the cake meal, 
then fold the egg yolk mixture into the chocolate. 
Beat the egg whites with salt until softly peaked. Add the sugar and con- 
tinue beating until the whites hold peaks but are still creamy-textured, not dry. 
Quickly fold one-third of the whites into the chocolate until almost blend- 
ed in. Then fold in the rest, just until both mixtures are incorporated. Pour the 
batter into the pan, and gently rotate the pan to level the batter. 
Bake the cake for 15 minutes, then remove it from the oven and allow it to 
cool to room temperature. It will seem underbaked and may be cracked on top. 
Use a sharp knife to cut the cake away from the sides of the pan, then refrigerate 
it in the pan for at least 4 hours or overnight. Cut around the pan again, remove 
the sides and invert the pan, peel off the paper, then invert the cake again to 
serve it. Serve with the glaze. 
CHOCOLATE GLAZE 
3 ounces semisweet chocolate 
3 ounces unsweetened chocolate or cocoa 
6 tablespoons canola or safflower oil 
1 tablespoon honey 
Melt the ingredients together in the top of the double boiler over simmer 
ing water until smooth. Place the top of the double boiler over ice water, and 
continue to stir the glaze until it thickens slightly but still pours. It will be slightly 
warm to the touch. Pour gently over the cooled cake. 


AFTERWORD AGAIN - 257 
THE MOON 
Kabbalistic and Chassidic understandings of the rhythms of the moon— 
contraction, disappearance, renewal, expansion—have drawn more attention 
and involvement in recent years as guides to human spiritual change. One result 
has been more attention to Yom Kippur Katan—the tradition of a fast from sun- 
rise to sunset on the day before the new moon, Rosh Chodesh. 
So it seems fitting to conclude this review of new ways to understand and 
celebrate the seasons of our joy in the most recent generation of the Jewish 
people with these excerpts from a song by Rabbi Shefa Gold: 
The Dark Rays of the Moon 
My flaws are showing all too clear, 
In the dark rays of the moon 
All my certainties will disappear, 
In the dark rays of the moon. 
I surrender to the shadow’s glare, 
In the dark rays of the moon 
J am strengthened by the truth I bare, 
In the dark rays of the moon. 
Rachamana d’oney litvirey liba, aneyna, aneyna. 
{Compassionate One who answers broken hearts, answer us, 
answer us.] 
In exile I am forced to roam, 
In the dark rays of the moon 
Till my prayerful longing brings me home, 
In the dark rays of the moon 
Though I see my life in shades of dark, 
In the dark rays of the moon 
In the deepest depths there glows a spark, 
In the dark rays of the moon. 
Rachamana d’oney litvirey liba, aneyna, aneyna.” 
JEWISH APPROACHES 
TO AMERICAN HOLIDAYS 
In this past generation, as many younger Jews have become more com- 
fortable with making “fringes” instead of “fences” between Jewish and general 


258 - AFTERWORD AGAIN 
American spaces, they have brought some Jewish flavorings and insights into 
American festivals. 
NEW YEAR’S DAY 
In some communities, adepts at shofar-blowing have learned to play “Auld 
Lang Syne” on the shofar, thus making a thread of connection between the two 
New Years. 
MARTIN LUTHER KING’S BIRTHDAY 
Every year, the official celebration of Dr. King’s birthday on the second 
Monday in January comes close to the yohrzeit (death anniversary) of Rabbi Abra- 
ham Joshua Heschel, on 18 Tevet (in late December or early January). 
The two worked closely together for racial equality and against the Vietnam 
War. Rabbi Heschel returned from the great march for voting rights in Selma, 
Alabama, in 1965 to say, “I felt as if my legs were praying.” And he stood beside 
Dr. King on April 4, 1967, at a meeting of Clergy and Laity Concerned about 
Vietnam, held at Riverside Church in New York City. There Dr. King gave one 
of his most transformative and controversial speeches, “Beyond Vietnam: A 
Time to Break the Silence.” When they both spoke out and took part in public 
vigils against the Vietnam War, many of their own supporters condemned them, 
but their partnership sustained them in the storm. 
On March 25, 1968, only a few days before Dr. King was killed, Heschel 
introduced King as the keynote speaker at the annual meeting of the Rabbinical 
Assembly, saying, “Where in America do we hear a voice like the voice of the 
prophets of Israel? Martin Luther King is a sign that God has not forsaken the 
United States of America. God has sent him to us. His presence is the hope of 
America.” 
The Christian custom of celebrating birthdays and the Jewish custom of 
celebrating yohrzeits thus bring together in memorial time these two coworkers 
and friends. Some Jewish communities mark the connection by reading and 
discussing King’s and Heschel’s writings both on Heschel’s yohrzeit and King’s 
birthday. (See especially Susannah Heschel’s collection of his works, Moral Gran- 
deur and Spiritual Audacity [Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1997], and items on their 
connection at http://www.theshalomcenter.org/treasury/52.) 
EOURTH OFIU by 
Probably the first statement of limits to the power of a king is the portion 
of Deuteronomy 17:14-20. In some communities it is the custom to read this 
passage from the Torah Scroll on July 4 or the nearest Shabbos and then to read 


AFTERWORD AGAIN - 259 
part or all of the Declaration of Independence as a Haftarah, followed by discus- 
sion of how we would now deal with the powers of our own rulers or leaders. 
LABOR DAY 
Urged and sometimes assisted with sermonic materials by the Jewish Labor 
Committee, many rabbis speak on Jewish tradition about the rights and respon- 
sibilities of organized labor on the Shabbos before Labor Day.: 
\ 
THANKSGIVING 
The early Pilgrim and Puritan celebrations of Thanksgiving saw it as a har- 
vest festival and connected it to the biblical Sukkot. Some Jewish families, feeling 
the partial similarities with Passover—the focus on a meal, the spiritual mean- 
ing of giving thanks, the gathering of family—have brought Jewish prayers of 
thanks and praise to the table. Here is one verse and the chorus of Rabbi Shefa 
Gold’s joyful, funny, and thankful Thanksgiving “blessing-afterthe-meal” (Birkat 
HaMazon): 
Thanksgiving Song 
You are the Source of Pleasure 
All things precious, everything we treasure, 
Friendship, love, and pecan pie, 
All things delicious till the day I die. 
(Chorus) 
Thank you God for this abundant food, 
And for putting us in a grateful mood. 
Hodu Ladonai ki tov, ki P’olam, ki l’olam chasdo!'® 
Since there are some tales of early celebrations of Thanksgiving in which 
Native Americans and Euro-Americans celebrated together, some have also used 
the day to remember and mourn the bloody history of the treatment of the Na- 
tive communities. 
MEMORIAL DAY AND VETERANS DAY 
Memorial Day began in mourning for the dead of the Civil War; Veterans 
Day as Armistice Day, marking the end of World War I and the hope that it 
would be the last war. Some Jewish communities have therefore marked these 
days with a special “Mourners’ Kaddish in Time of War and Violence,” echoing 
especially in English translation sorrow for the dead and for the continuation 
of war: 


260 - AFTERWORD AGAIN 
Yitgadal V’yit’kadash Shmei Rabah 
May Your Great Name, through our expanding awareness and our fuller 
action, lift You to become still higher and more holy. 
For Your Great Name weaves together all the names of all the beings in 
the universe, among them our own names, and it is we who give You the 
strength to lift us into holiness (Cong: Amein) 
B’alma divra chi’ rooteh v’yamlich malchuteh b’chayeichun, u’v yomeichun, 
u’v'chayei d’chol beit yisrael, b’agalah u’vzman kariv, v’imru: Amein. 
throughout the world that You have offered us, a world of majestic peace- 
ful order that gives life to the Godwrestling folk through time and through 
eternity—and let’s say, Amein 
Y’hei sh’mei rabbah, me’vorach, |’olam almei almaya. 
so may the Great Name be blessed, through every Mystery and Mastery of 
every universe. 
Yitbarach, v’yishtabach, v’yitpa’ar, v’yitromam, v’yitnasei, v’yit’hadar, 
v’yit’aleh, v’yit’ halal—Shmei di’kudshah—Brich hu (Cong: Brich Hu) 
May Your Name be blessed and celebrated, Its beauty honored and raised 
high, may It be lifted and carried, may Its radiance be praised in all Its 
Holiness—Blessed be! ‘ 
Leylah min kol bir’chatah v’shir’atah tush’be’chatah v’nehematah, 
de’amiran be’alma, v imru: Amein (Cong: Amein) 
Even though we cannot give You enough blessing, enough song, enough 
praise, enough consolation to match what we wish to lay before You— 
and though we know that today there is no way to console You when 
among us some who bear Your Image in our being are slaughtering others 
who bear Your Image in our being— 
Yehei Shlama Rabah min Shemaya v’chayyim aleinu v’al kol Yisrael, 
vimru Amein. 
still we beseech that from the unity of Your Great Name flow a great and 
joyful harmony and life for us and for all who wrestle God (Cong: Amein); 
Oseh Shalom bi’m’romay, hu ya’aseh shalom aleinu v'al kol yisrael v’al kol 
yishmael v’al kol yoshvei tevel—v’imru: Amein. 
You Who makes harmony in the ultimate reaches of the universe, teach 
us to make harmony within ourselves, among ourselves—and peace for the 
children of Abraham, through Hagar and through Sarah: the children of 
Israel and the children of Ishmael; and for all who dwell upon this planet 
(Cong: Amein). 


AFTERWORD AGAIN - 26] 
GO AND STUDY 
See Michael Strassfeld, Jewish Holidays (HarperCollins, 1985); Joan Nathan’s 
Jewish Holiday Kitchen (Schocken, 2004); Phyllis Glazer and Miryam Glazer, The 
Essential Book of Jewish Festival Cooking (HarperCollins, 2004); and two online 
collections of essays about the festivals: http://www.theshalomcenter.org/trea- 
sury/9, and http://www.jewcology.com/resources. 
For thought about the meanings of Passover and Shavuos in our genera- 
tion, see Arthur Waskow and Phyllis Berman, Freedom Journeys: The Tale of Exodus 
and Wilderness across Millennia (Jewish Lights, 2010). 
And for more on all the holidays, see Paul Steinberg, Celebrating the Jewish 
Year, in three volumes: The Fall Holidays; The Winter Holidays; and The Spring and 
Summer Holidays (Jewish Publication Society, 2006-7). 
NOTTS 
. Copyright © 1998 by Rabbi Zalman Schachter-Shalomi. Excerpts published here with 
the author's permission. The entire text is at http://www.theshalomcenter.org/con 
tent/reb-zalmans-prayers-hoshana-rabbah. 
See the Sierra Club article at http://www.sierraclub.org/sierra/199811/rabbis.asp. 
. Copyright © 1988 by Margot Stein, Rayzel Raphael, and Juliet Spitzer. Published here 
with the authors’ permission. The full song is accessible at http://www.shechinah —e 
wn 
.com/grr/lyrics-rayzel.html. 
4. See the story of these “Seder sisters,” together with the text of the Haggadah they used, 
in Esther Broner, The Telling (HarperCollins, 1993). 
. For the former, see The Shalom Seders (Adamah Books), and for the latter, see http:// 
www.theshalomcenter.org/node/ 1516. 
6. See http://www.theshalomcenter.org/haggadah-for-the-earth. 
7. Copyright © 2011 by Rabbi Zalman SchachterShalomi. Published here with the au- 
thor’s permission. 
8. My teacher in this matter is David Waskow, who years ago spent several months in 
Morocco that spanned Pesach and Ramadan. 
9. Copyright © 2005 by Shefa Gold. The whole song, and her comments on Yom Kippur 
Katan, can be accessed at http://www. rabbishefagold.com/YomKippurKatan.html. 
10. Copyright © 2002 by Shefa Gold. You can download the entire song, including the 
melody, at http://www.rabbishefagold.com/ThanksgivingSong.html. Nn 


‘Ad Stones | wstvy 4S Your 
DW, About Karung * “own le 
Manna ,S0 nani UttwEent CAaltwe $ 
-pamallitAs mM beto~w A UNM? 
(maybe itss face AME wens utd | ABOUT THE AUTHOR "pean fits ) 
ARTHUR WASKOW grew up in Baltimore during the 1930s and 1940s. After taking a doctorate 
in U.S. History, he served as a legislative assistant in the U.S. House of Representatives and 
became a leading activist in the anti-war movements of the 1960s. Waskow did research at the 
Institute for Policy Studies and at the Public Resource Center, writing six books on such issues as 
American foreign policy, race relations, and energy policy. 
In the midst of the social upheavals of 1968, Waskow began to feel deep stirrings of Jewish 
identity and started to wrestle with the meaning of Jewish tradition and thought. Out of this 
experience he wrote two books: 
The Freedom Seder, which intertwined traditional Passover texts with modern passages on 
freedom and slavery, and The Bush Is Burning, an examination of the meaning of Jewish identity 
in our generation. He became part of the Havurah movement of small, joyful and participatory 
congregations of creatively traditional Jews. He wrote the book Godwrestling about how his 
rediscovery of Torah was both helping him remake his own life and casting new light on how to 
deal with the crises of American society. 
In 1979 Waskow founded a journal of Jewish renewal that is now called New Menorah and is 
published by the B'nai Or Religious Fellowship, with Waskow as editor. He began teaching at the 
Reconstructionist Rabbinical College in 1982, and in 1984 published These Holy Sparks—stories 
and histories of the movement for Jewish renewal. 
Together with his son, David, and his daughter, Shoshana, he wrote Before There Was a 
Before—new and delightful stories of the Seven Days of Creation. 
Waskow reunited three of the major strands in his life—his commitments to peace, to 
Judaism, and to the lives of his children—when in 1983 he became Director of The Shalom 
Center, a resource and organizing center for Jewish perspectives on preventing nuclear holo- 
caust. bed 
ABOUT THE ARTISTS 
MARTIN FARREN and JOAN BENJAMIN-FARREN met in 1967 when they were graduate 
students at The University of lowa. Joan graduated in 1969 with a Master of Arts degree in Art 
and Martin graduated two years later with a Ph.D. in Music. 
Since that time they have collaborated as artists in the fields of theater and music, as well as 
the plastic arts, with that collaboration reaching its most intense expression in the art of Jewish 
Papercutting. 
They approach their art from a highly literary point of view and express the words and ideas 
of Jewish tradition in visual terms which are rich in detailed symbolism. Their work has often 
been described as a kind of visual midrash (commentary). 
They write: “We have tried to create a work of art which is not only beautiful to the eye, but 
when ‘unpacked’ of its symbolic meaning will be beautiful also to the heart.” 
Joan and Martin have lectured widely on their work and the history of Jewish papercutting, 
and have exhibited throughout the United States and in Israel. Their Papercuts are in private collections in this country as well as in Europe and Israel, and are held in the permanent 
collections of such major museums as the Wolfson Museum at the Seat of the Chief Rabbinate in Jerusalem and the H.U.C. Skirball Museum in Los Angeles, California. 
The Farrens make their home with their two children, Shoshanna and Yosef, a few miles south of Boston, in Sharon, Massachusetts. 
OMSsmrd husem aay 41 QAIYMAN FAISIO & QW 58990 Ud 
me hive pingm aahvw - 
rad d Va tou Ky wnwwy Ms UW WWMM+ QV 
7 GL SHA Ora eee SINID At +doyv val uv - 
MWY AMY POUSVY | VULWAN WA) 4+ 


listo 121 class 
“MASPOVA —p spreadana oF 
dOwwyS UWL 
— eM grou ai 
iS vestovres) EES 
Wodem : |A4G Start of \Svae 
-SipntsS Wow Wwe UNA ersTOnd + 
WAGACA in he WONA —p Cmncal 
7 Judasvy, 
-\SyvatA -— Judaism is fulne OF 
CUMAn’e , PA of Ute eid 
US —» dias pom CUltrre, iid UDIM lvivas TA eto , 
judousm cCoMterer 
AMIN SUV MADAME 
_ JUAMASM IS SO Attp 
yooxta mM Wistoy, 4 X Pl ee 
LDIANMN AANNAA 
Dany haat 


No+es ae 
Judaism ac a veigion| way 
of Ute Is always M Angina 
(New debates, 4utSnous, ways 
ot Lowa MWwnas » 
- ve Wat OPEUNeSS, $0 
much flembiuM to 
> Celebrate ¢ mtrEerpVve;»n 
iN) your ow wa 
“Monday cademee pyoides 
nme +0 vecomnecr 4 vetresh 
(vewunds us 4D Wwe) 
p15) - power War God INES, v, 
Moves Wn TOYWard_, 
vt Ws Pras 
OWWWWs | Senous, Wnt 
Mopeful and win pnwise 
oF jm 
Yom Kap pw - Magne day 
Pp 2\ write 4 \errerl 20SH HASHRAN ARC 
AQ UMaY ‘cs aU VuUnd ‘63 2UsaaMS .p0a} - 


P4] Summavy of RH» YE 


idaus 
sctgpenng tee valde Leen le 
— VP WWE, , 
- StI gtheng (pers ma 
AA oO vA Am WAS A P SY 
- {Au canonas 
“gr dann ( fw avn 
ward orhers and 
UnAetstnmndrna | Lo Pin 
WW Wnts 
- ¥EAAInA | us tow ve 
ee ee 
aav) ~ aPPWpna tr Ute 
2 B00 KE -ndtwna about 
Snabbvar 


CPSIA information can be obtained at www.ICGtesting.com 
Printed in the USA 
LVOW 12s1919080215 
426169LV00003B/4/P 


“Seasons of Our Joy brings reverent renewal to ancient practices. And 
it presents new understanding and approaches that we are invited to 
sanctify. This book will heighten your awareness of the eternal religious 
power of the Jewish calendar? — Rabbi Gordon Tucker, former dean, 
Jewish Theological Seminary 
“A wonderful blend of information and innovation that will help readers 
find both traditional and new meaning in the Jewish holidays.’—Judith 
Plaskow, author of Standing Again at Sinai 
“There is a poetic quality to the writing, and the ideas are original, 
provocative, and enriching.’—Library Journal 
“Arthur Waskow’s fresh, imaginative vision brings the familiar Jewish 
holidays to life with new meaning.’— Rabbi Harold S. Kushner 
“Arthur Waskow’s unique voice, at once eloquent, musical, creative, and 
passionate, rings throughout Seasons of Our Joy, weaving together strands 
of Jewish life””—Rabbi David Saperstein, director, Religious Action Center 
of Reform Judaism 
ircling the Jewish calendar from Rosh Hashanah to Tisha B’Ay, this 
lively, accessible guide provides rituals, recipes, songs, prayers, and 
suggestions for new approaches to holiday observance. Rabbi Arthur 
O. Waskow explores the meaning of each holiday in relation to the history of 
the Jewish people and individual spirituality, examines how the place of each 
holiday in the cycle of the moon and the changing seasons affects the mood 
of the day, and suggests ritual and spiritual ways to prepare for each festival. 
In his extensive afterword to this new edition of Seasons of Our Joy, Rabbi 
Waskow addresses the many changes Judaism has undergone in the last thirty 
years, as feminist Judaism, neo-Chassidic mysticism, eco-Judaism, and Jewish 
meditation have newly colored our understanding of the festivals. 
RABBI ARTHUR O. Waskow is an author and political activist associated with 
the Jewish Renewal movement. He is the founder and director of the Shalom 
Center and the author of numerous books, including Godwrestling and 
Down-to-Earth Judaism: Food, Money, Sex, and the Rest of Life. 
The Jewish Publication Society ISBN 978-0-8276-0930-3 US $18.95 Philadelphia Pa 19103-1399 | | | 51895 
www.jpsbooks.com | | 
9"780827"609303 ulany a}2uUva/ AsajIN09 378 IaAO 
u2ZIQ 


